Global Adaptive Filtering Layer for Computer Vision Viktor Shipitsin*, Iaroslav Bespalov*, Dmitry V. Dylov† Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology Bolshoy blvd., 30/1, Moscow, Russia 121205 {Viktor.Shipitsin, Iaroslav.Bespalov, d.dylov}@skoltech.ru Abstract We devise a universal adaptive neural layer to “learn” optimal frequency ﬁlter for each image together with the weights of the base neural network that performs some computer vision task. The proposed approach takes the source image in the spatial domain, automatically selects the best frequencies from the frequency domain, and trans- mits the inverse-transform image to the main neural net- work. Remarkably, such a simple add-on layer dramatically improves the performance of the main network regardless of its design. We observe that the light networks gain a notice- able boost in the performance metrics; whereas, the train- ing of the heavy ones converges faster when our adaptive layer is allowed to “learn” alongside the main architec- ture. We validate the idea in four classical computer vision tasks: classiﬁcation, segmentation, denoising, and erasing, considering popular natural and medical data benchmarks. 1. Introduction In recent years, computer vision (CV) algorithms have advanced signiﬁcantly thanks to the advent of artiﬁcial neu- ral networks (ANN) and to the development of the com- putational resources capable of working with them [39]. At the same time, the constantly growing volumes of data insti- gated a wave of research efforts involving large neural net- works with a colossal number of parameters [36], triggering the development of approaches for efﬁcient data processing, model optimization, and training. One promising trend is not to keep complicating the architectures, but to develop efﬁcient modules that allow one to look at computer tasks from a different angle, extracting semantics from the images and ultimately demanding less effort [14, 34]. What could be done with the images even before they enter a certain *Contributed equally. †Corresponding author. neural network is generally concerned with the task of im- age preprocessing [6] and will be the leitmotif in this work. Particularly, we are interested in developing a ‘smart’ pre- processing module to the following four classical CV prob- lems: segmentation, classiﬁcation, erasing, and denoising. The segmentation task is one of the most popular tasks in the ﬁeld of CV, as it allows to localize the object of interest in the image. When image segmentation is concerned, one naturally starts with the U-Net encoder-decoder like mod- els [35]. At the moment, there are various modiﬁcations that prove more accurate than the baseline U-Net in various scenarios: Attention U-Net [30], U-Net++ [50, 51], U-Net 3+ [18], etc.. Although much heavier and slower in train- ing, ResNet and DenseNet models are also frequently em- ployed for the purpose of segmentation [17, 15]. One nat- urally looks for lighter models that would reach the perfor- mance level of the heavier models with dozens of millions of parameters [15, 39]. Image classiﬁcation is frequently deﬁned as the task of categorizing images into one of several predeﬁned classes, and it is another popular problem in CV [33, 39]. Binary classiﬁcation is a precursor problem to many other CV chal- lenges, and is an analogy to the segmentation, with the out- put being a single pixel. The same segmentation encoders can be employed for the classiﬁcation problem to obtain an embedding, and then, linear layers would predict the class [33]. Denoising is another important task in imaging which covers extensive range of domains and applications [28]. Popular approaches, such as DnCNN [46, 52], already be- came classic and can restore blurred, damaged, and noisy images exceptionally well. Naturally, denoising is also the problem where frequency decomposition of an image be- comes a particularly important entity for a computer sci- entist [47, 28]. It is interesting how the frequency spectra change in the denoising tasks. For example, one can cut out an area from an image and see how a denoising model would paint over the area in the presence of frequency ﬁlter- ing. Such erasing [39] task will be also brieﬂy considered arXiv:2010.01177v4 [eess.IV] 4 Aug 2021 in this work and is adjacent to another popular problem of super-resolution in CV, where the missing pixels are pro- cessed to minimize the damage to the image or to maximize a value function such as the resolution. The problem of frequency ﬁltering for denoising has been studied very thoroughly in the signal processing and in the imaging physics communities [9, 10]. In fact, the ﬁltering is at the core of one of the most frequently used clinical imaging modalities – the ultrasound [19]. Its typ- ical high\mid-range (5-15 MHz) and low (2-5 MHz) fre- quency probes provide either good resolution or good pen- etration, but not both at once. The resulting images, there- fore, are extremely sensitive to the frequency tuning, with various phenomena such as reverberation, shadowing, ex- cessive absorbance, reﬂection, and echo, giving the images the distinct grainy look [38, 43]. What operators of the medical ultrasound do with their knobs on the machine’s panel to enhance the appearance of the images in real time has motivated us to mimic the similar ‘live’ ﬁltering for the CV problems. Speciﬁcally, we asked ourselves, what if a pre-training block of a neural network would be capable of learning the optimal frequen- cies for each image in the dataset live during the training, effectively maximizing a value function of interest for the entire model? Can we design a universal adaptive layer that would provide the necessary frequency ﬁlter for any input image regardless of the network architecture or the CV task at hand? Herein, we present such a solution. Using the direct and the inverse Fourier transforms, we can switch from the representation of the image in the spa- tial domain to that in the frequency domain and vice versa. In the frequency spectrum, particular frequencies are re- sponsible for different properties of the image [39], which can be either enhanced or suppressed with ﬁltering, depend- ing on the value function of interest in one of the four CV problems described above. For example, the high-pass ﬁl- ter, used for the edge detection, can enhance edges and de- tails, effectively holding promise for improving the segmen- tation performance if it partook in the training routine along with the main segmentation network. In this article, we de- vise a simple adaptive add-on layer that improves the qual- ity and efﬁciency of popular neural networks in CV. The layer learns to automatically ﬁnd a global ﬁlter that will leave only those frequencies that could boost the target met- ric in the entire dataset (e.g., Dice score in the segmentation, or F1-score in the classiﬁcation problem). The rest of the paper is structured as follows. After cov- ering the work related to learning in the Fourier domain in Section 2, we describe the algorithm behind the global adaptive layer in Section 3. We then describe the datasets in Subsection 4.1: two medical (ultrasound, which has mo- tivated our work) and four natural image data benchmarks, hypothesizing that the wave nature of the ultrasonic data would correspond to a more efﬁcient ﬁltering than that of the natural images. However, the rest of Section 4 reports a likewise enhancement of the baseline performance for the natural images as well. Section 4 also reports faster training convergence for the majority of models and tasks and sum- marizes the results of a controlled and a large-scale studies. Sections 5 and 6 conclude the paper. Contributions of this paper are the following: • The ﬁrst adaptive layer to be trained alongside the main neural network to boost its performance by ﬁnd- ing globally optimal ﬁltering frequencies. • A simple, universal, ﬂexible, and intuitive solution for improving and accelerating neural networks. • We show at least 6 % increase in Dice score for light U-Net-like architectures, and accelerate convergence of heavier models (such as ResNet and DenseNet). • We report 88 experimental scenarios, 5 variations of the adaptive layer, adding them on to 5 popular archi- tectures, and testing the outcomes on 6 (4 natural and 2 medical) dataset benchmarks in 4 CV tasks. • Careful control and large-scale studies are reported. 2. Related Work Adoption of the learning algorithms from the non-image domains to improve either the target metric or the efﬁciency of neural networks is a rather recent trait. The Fourier space is one of such domains, where there are several works re- porting the spectral transforms with consequent feature ex- traction to train their models [31, 27, 26]. Fourier analysis has also been successfully used for dynamic structure seg- mentation problems, where dynamic structures were distin- guished using only the phase spectra [25]. We obviously omit a long list of works here, where the frequency data was used for feature engineering or for some domain-speciﬁc machine learning applications. In 2020, however, there appeared a relevant work report- ing semantic segmentation with domain adaptation [44], where the spectral amplitudes of the source and the tar- get images were combined to boost the performance of the model. High-frequency low-dimensional regression prob- lems (where Fourier features improved the results of the coordinate-based multi-layer perceptions for image regres- sion), 3D shape regression, MRI reconstruction, and inverse rendering tasks are also some very recent results [40]. These aforementioned works have shown their effective- ness by proving that some information could be lost if one relies merely on the spatial image domain. The difﬁculty, however, is that the manual selection of the correct frequen- cies for optimizing an ANN is not a simple task. Remark- ably, none of the algorithms makes effort to optimize the frequency spectra during the training routine of the main ar- chitecture. Therefore, our solution is to automate the search Input image Trainable part preprocessing prediction Segmentation Classification Eraising Denoising Global Adaptive Filtering Layer Neural Network Input Image trainable part preprocessing prediction Figure 1. Diagram of the proposed method. Global Adaptive Fil- tering Layer is trained together with the weights of the main neural network until the prediction is maximized in a given CV task. for the optimal weights in the frequency spectrum until the desired metric of a given network is maximized for each CV task. Despite being rather intuitive, such a solution has not been reported in the literature, motivating our study herein. 3. Method Data preprocessing is an essential part of any CV algo- rithm [39], primarily done in the image space [8]. Propos- ing the same in the Fourier space, we want to dismiss the meaningless features associated with spectral frequencies brought to the scene by the image acquisition systems (an ultrasound machine or a photo camera, in our case). As such, the method we look for belongs to the class of min- imum features inductive bias algorithms [13]. The desired ‘smart’ spectral preprocessing method should automatically distill the meaningful frequencies, being aware of the entire model and ‘adapting’ to the entire dataset. We propose the concept of such a globally adaptive neu- ral layer (see Fig. 1), which could be trained together with a model of interest to solve a given CV problem. By plac- ing this layer in front of the baseline model, the algorithm should automatically select the weights for the frequency components of all images sent in as the input to carry out ﬁl- tering with one purpose only: improve whatever the main architecture attempts to do. Theoretically [5, 21, 7], while performing the Fourier transform, it is possible to move from the frequency domain to the spatial one (and vice versa) without a loss of infor- mation. The Fourier transform has the property of linearity, preserving the accuracy of signal approximation (Parseval’s theorem [5]), which is valid when the signal is represented using discrete vectors. Deﬁne the Fourier transform as FI(u, v) = n−1 X x=0 m−1 X y=0 I(x, y) nm exp  −2πixu n −2πiyv m  , where I is the original image (spatial description) of size n × m, and FI is the frequency domain image. If the im- age has multiple channels, we transform each channel sep- arately by the same formula. For the visual analysis of Fourier transform, one usually works with the spectrum1, i.e., the coordinate-wise absolute value |FI|, or the energy spectrum |FI|2. To ﬁlter image in the frequency domain, we choose to take a function that modiﬁes spectrum |FI| in a speciﬁc way. There is ﬂexibil- ity in designing ﬁltering functions [21]. E.g., one can in- dependently select the frequencies to suppress or enhance; however, due to the wide variety of options and the speciﬁcs of each task, it is very difﬁcult to select them manually. In contrast, the proposed design of the ﬁltering layer shown in Fig. 1 is capable of automatically forming a more sophisti- cated and a task-speciﬁc ﬁlter 2. To approximate an arbitrary nonlinear function that per- forms the desired ﬁltering, a neural network with just one hidden layer is enough, yielding: |FI| ←W2 ∗σ  W1 ∗|FI| + B1  + B2, where W1 and W2 are the weight matrices with non- negative elements, B1 are B2 are the bias matrices with non-negative elements, σ(·) is some nonlinear activation function, and “∗” denotes element-wise multiplication. Al- gorithm 1 describes the complete function of the proposed global adaptive ﬁltering layer. Handling small frequency values. When a base neural network is chosen, our layer is pre-pended to it and, then, evaluated with several variations to experiment with the small values of non-central frequencies. Namely, for the Linear conﬁguration, a simple single layer neural network of Algorithm 1 is used. For the General conﬁguration, the exponential transform was additionally applied: |FI| ←exp h W ∗log (1 + |FI|) i −1, 1We do not center our discussion around phase, which could also prove useful for some applications. See Supplementary material. 2Basic Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and the element-wise multiplica- tion functions in modern software packages are suitable. Algorithm 1: Global Adaptive Filtering Layer Input: I – Initial image. F – Fast Fourier Transform operator. 1: W1, W2, B1, B2 = ReLU( W1, W2, B1, B2); 2: F = FI; 3: S = W2 ∗σ  W1 ∗|F| + B1  + B2; 4: S = S ∗F/|F|; 5: I′ = F−1S; Output: I′ – Image after global frequency ﬁltering. where W is the trained weight matrix (non-negative). For the Linear log and the General log conﬁgurations, only the log transforms of the spectra were computed. These conﬁg- urations are designed to ‘boost’ the appearance of the small- est frequency pixel values in the spectrum, where the inten- sity of a typical central frequency oftentimes ‘overwhelms’ the smaller values on the periphery (see insets in Fig. 2 be- low to see typical spike-shaped learnt spectra). Number of parameters. The complex values of Fourier transform are tackled by the operation |FI|. Yet, the important symmetry property FI(n −u, m −v) = FI(−u, −v) = FI(u, v)∗helps to compute the number of parameters added by the adaptive layers. Namely, each matrix of weights is a tensor of size  C, n, ⌊m/2⌋+ 1  , where C is the number of channels, (n, m) is the image size. Thus, the number of learnable parameters of the pro- posed adaptive layer is equal to the number of weight matri- ces multiplied by the product of the matrix dimensions (as the operations in the frequency space are element-wise). 4. Experiments and Results In this section, we compare the performance of renowned neural networks with and without the proposed trainable layers. In all four tasks, we always choose the most popular models, common initialization strategies, and only the well-known activation and loss functions. We aim to make the existing network architectures more efﬁcient. Hyperparameters common to all tasks. All models are trained setting the input size to (256, 256), batch size 4, and using Adam optimizer [20] with learning rate 0.001. 4.1. Datasets We validate efﬁciency of our adaptive layer on two med- ical and on four natural image benchmarks. The medical benchmarks comprise ultrasonic datasets, popular in medical vision community: Breast Ultrasound Images  BUSI [3], 1578 images of three classes: normal (266), benign (891) and malignant (421) tumors, as well as ground-truth segmentation masks  and Brachial Plexus Ultrasound Images  BPUI [1], 5635 images and masks  . The natural benchmarks were selected to represent well- known datasets of various scales: from the small Caltech Birds  Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 [42], 11,788 im- ages of 200 classes with ground-truth segmentation masks  , to medium Dogs vs. Cats  [2], 25k images for binary classiﬁcation  , to large-scale CIFAR-10  [22], 50k images of 10 classes  and a part of ImageNet  ‘Tiny’ ImageNet [24], 110k images of 200 classes  . We considered medical imaging datasets separately be- cause the ultrasound signal is known to have particular fre- quency bands needed for the optimal image contrast in live Figure 2. SEGMENTATION RESULTS. Examples of ’learnt’ ﬁl- ters and their effect on the segmentation. Top left: original image and ground-truth mask; top right: Linear ﬁlter; bottom left: Gen- eral ﬁlter; bottom right: General log ﬁlter. Corresponding ‘learnt’ spectra are shown in the insets in the corner. imaging [19], making us hypothesize that the ﬁltering effect would be more pronounced in these data. Dataset details and descriptions are given in the Supplementary material. 4.2. Segmentation To test the proposed method, three different net- works were studied as the base models: U-Net [35], DenseNet [17], and ResNet [15]. For the learning process, we used the Combined Loss function of Dice and Cross Entropy, weighted as 0.6 and 0.4 respectively. The quality of segmentation is evaluated with the Dice coefﬁcient [29], which, in essence, measures the overlap between the pre- dicted and the ground-truth masks. The following hyperparameters were used. For U-Net, init features = 32 (number of parameters in initial convo- lution), depth = 3 (number of downsteps). For DenseNet (as for densenet-121), init features = 32, growth rate = 32 (number of ﬁlters to add to each layer), block conﬁg = 6, 12, 24, 16 (number of layers in each pooling block). For ResNet (as for resnet-18), blocks: 2, 2, 2, 2 (number of lay- ers in each pooling block). We observe improvement of the segmentation perfor- mance in all three base models, as summarized in Figs. 2, 3, and in Table 1. Comprehensive results for each dataset and each model are given in the Supplementary material. 4.3. Classiﬁcation To verify the suggested algorithm for the classiﬁcation problem, a typical Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with several convolutional blocks and fully-connected lay- ers is used. Namely, the encoder blocks include conv, Table 1. SEGMENTATION RESULTS. Validation Dice score for dif- ferent models on medical (BUSI and BPUI) and natural (Caltech Birds) datasets. Red: the worst model, green: the best model. Model BUSI BPUI Birds U-Net 0.70 0.59 0.84 + Fourier Linear 0.72 0.64 0.85 + Fourier Linear log 0.71 0.64 0.86 + Fourier General 0.75 0.74 0.86 + Fourier General log 0.75 0.74 0.86 DenseNet 0.77 0.74 0.94 + Fourier Linear 0.79 0.77 0.94 + Fourier Linear log 0.80 0.77 0.94 + Fourier General 0.81 0.74 0.95 + Fourier General log 0.77 0.75 0.94 ResNet 0.80 0.71 0.93 + Fourier Linear 0.81 0.72 0.94 + Fourier Linear Log 0.81 0.72 0.94 + Fourier General 0.81 0.74 0.94 + Fourier General Log 0.81 0.75 0.94 Batch Normalization, ReLU, Average Pooling, and two fully-connected layers (using init features = 8 and depth = Figure 3. SEGMENTATION RESULTS. Average Dice coefﬁcients on validation sets of different datasets: medical (BUSI) and natural (Birds). Top row: U-Net, middle: DenseNet, bottom: ResNet. 4). The training process is similar to the one above, with using the weighted Cross Entropy Loss [16] combined with the F1-score evaluation. The results for this task for medi- cal and natural datasets are presented in Fig. 4 and Table 2. Additional natural image classiﬁcation experiments were performed on large-scale datasets CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, with the results presented in Table 3 and Fig. 6. Figure 4. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS: BINARY. Left: Initial and ﬁltered images using our layer in General log conﬁguration. Insets show the ‘learnt’ optimal spectra. Right: F1-scores on BUSI validation sets (normal vs. benign and benign vs. malignant). Table 2. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS: BINARY. F1-scores for dif- ferent models on BUSI validation set (normal vs. benign and be- nign vs. malignant classes), and Dogs vs. Cats datasets. Red: the worst model, green: the best model. Model BUSI BUSI D vs. C norm vs. ben ben vs. mal CNN 0.88 0.76 0.82 + Fourier Linear 0.89 0.78 0.83 + Fourier Linear log 0.89 0.77 0.82 + Fourier General 0.90 0.76 0.82 + Fourier General log 0.92 0.77 0.83 4.4. Denoising and Erasing For the problem of denoising and erasing, we considered popular model DnCNN [45] as the baseline, the main task of which is to restore the noise, in contrast to the standard feedforward models, which restore the image. To assess the success of denoising and erasing, we used Combined Loss function of MS-SSIM and L1 Loss with weights 0.8 and 0.2 respectively [48] along with the FSIM and PSNR metrics [47]. Regular Gaussian noise and rectangular eras- ing corruptions [49] were introduced to the images, with the consequent image recovery yielding the outcomes sum- marized in Fig. 5. For the denoising and erasing problems, Figure 5. DENOISING/ERASING RESULTS. Plots on the right show FSIM metrics for denoising and erasing corruptions of BUSI dataset for different models. First and second row images, left to right: base DnCNN model results, the model with Linear, and with General adaptive ﬁlters on BUSI dataset. Third and fourth rows, left to right: base model and model with Linear adaptive ﬁltering layer on the Dogs vs. Cats dataset. Note how addition of Fourier-based layer corrects for the corruptions better (e.g., dog images in fourth vs. third row). we used the following hyperparameters: init features = 64, num layers = 17 (number of layers). 4.5. Control and large-scale experiments To gauge the impact of the added layer on the base model precisely, a ﬁne control of the total number of trainable pa- rameters is desirable. Therefore, additional studies were performed for each CV problem, assuring that the number of parameters in base models was either greater or equal of that with the pre-pended adaptive ﬁltering layer (Table 3 and Fig. 6). In this sub-study, all experiments were run us- ing the Linear conﬁgurations of the adaptive layer. For the segmentation task, U-Net with init features = 32 was compared against U-Net with init features = 16 along with adaptive layer for BUSI (with image size = (512, 512), yielding 467,266 parameters in base model vs. 248,994 parameters in ours) and Caltech Birds (with image size = (256, 256), yielding 467,842 parameters in base model vs. 216,770 parameters in ours) datasets. For the classiﬁcation task, ResNet-20 was compared with the same model pre-pended by the adaptive layer for CIFAR-10 (with image size = (32, 32), yielding 276,026 vs. 274,394 parameters) and Tiny ImageNet (with image size = (64, 64), yielding 293,080 vs. 286,744 parameters) datasets. For these experiments, SGD optimizer with weight decay of 0.0001, momentum of 0.9, and learning rate 0.1 was used. For the denoising and erasing tasks, DnCNN with init features = 32 and num layers = 20 was compared to itself with init features = 16 and num layers = 17 and with the pre-pended adaptive layer for BUSI (with image size = (512, 512), yielding 168,225 vs. 167,169 parameters). 5. Discussion Remarkably, in the controlled experiments, we observed that the number of parameters in the base model could be reduced by half; yet, the global adaptive ﬁltering layer al- lows to ‘catch up’ with the lost parameters and to reach the level of the base models that have twice as many param- eters. The result generalize well across different datasets of various scales and across CV tasks. We did not ob- Table 3. CONTROL EXPERIMENTS RESULTS. Comparison between different models for segmentation (Dice score), classiﬁcation (Accu- racy), and Gaussian denoising and erasing corruptions (PSNR). The number of parameters in all experiments is controlled not to exceed the number of parameters in the corresponding base models. Model Segmentation Classiﬁcation Denoising Erasing BUSI Birds CIFAR-10 Tiny ImageNet BUSI BUSI Base model 0.64 0.86 0.782 0.345 30.69 23.28 + Fourier Linear 0.69 0.86 0.792 0.348 30.42 22.91 + Fourier Linear log 0.70 0.86 0.796 0.336 30.66 23.92 Figure 6. CONTROL AND LARGE-SCALE EXPERIMENTS. Met- rics on validation sets for different models. Top row: Dice score for segmentation problem on medical (BUSI, left) and natural (Caltech Birds, right) datasets. Middle row: Prediction accuracy for classiﬁcation problem on CIFAR-10 (left) and Tiny ImageNet (right) datasets. Bottom row: PSNR metric for Gaussian denoising (left) and erasing corruption (right) problems on BUSI dataset. serve a stunning improvement in the denoising problem built around DnCNN model – a result we attribute to the way the noise is handled in the Fourier domain, making our metric choice somewhat sub-optimal. Additional studies are required with the DnCNN to understand the enhance- ment dynamics; however, the same very model is well im- proved by our layer when there is a notable corruption (the erasing problem). We can visually conﬁrm that our adap- tive conﬁguration denoises and ‘heals’ the corruptions bet- ter than the base DnCNN model alone. Activation Functions. The activation function used in the general conﬁguration of proposed global ﬁltering layer is a hyperparameter that needs to be selected depending on the problem being solved and the dataset. In the provided al- gorithm, the function receives a non-negative matrix as in- put; it is since the frequency with negative weight has no physical interpretation. Therefore, several popular activa- tion functions have been selected and investigated. As can be seen in the results in the Supplementary material, the ac- tivation function plays an important role. The average dif- ference between the best and worst activation functions in some cases can lead to about 10% gain by metric. It should be noted that the activation functions Mish and ReLU have shown themselves well on all datasets. So, Mish and ReLU are good for using our algorithm out of the box. Note that all the experiments reported in the main text were carried out using ReLU activation function. Medical vs. Natural Datasets. In datasets collected us- ing ultrasound imaging, there are a lot of negative examples (with a zero or an empty mask). Unlike the Caltech Birds dataset, such data require more focus, dedication, and ex- pertise to annotate them with labels. But, as with all human- tagged data, one should expect artefacts and potential errors in the markings: for example, the BPUI data have been an- notated by pseudo-experts (people who have been trained and instructed by experts). Several important observations and conclusions can be made from the results in the ﬁgures herein and from those in the Supplementary material: • The observed improvement of Dice score on the ultra- sound datasets depends on the number of parameters of the base model: the larger the architecture size, the less noticeable the increase in the metric when using the adap- tive layer. • In the natural images dataset, there is a faster convergence of all models when the proposed ﬁltering layer is added, than in any of the base models. • The proposed log operation applied to the spectra allows Figure 7. Training efﬁciency as a function of model complexity for all 88 experiments. The bubble size encodes the gain in the corre- sponding metrics. Left: all experiments; right: zoomed-in areas. Colours correspond to different types of 4 CV tasks considered. Vertical and left-leaning arrows correspond to 18 control experiments run with precise control of the number of parameters in the models. The arrows indicate the correspondence of pairs (basic model →the most training-efﬁcient model with the proposed adaptive Fourier layer). Birds: Caltech Birds (2011) dataset; DvsC: Dogs vs. Cats dataset; CIFAR: CIFAR-10 dataset; ImageNet: Tiny ImageNet dataset. for the small pixel values and eliminates ﬂuctuation arte- facts otherwise appearing from the truncation. • Addition of the adaptive ﬁlter to the natural images pro- vides “smoother” convergence of the training curves. We believe this trait could be instrumental for accelerating many state-of-the-art models where predicting the be- haviour of the model is important; for example, in rein- forcement and/or active learning (Fig. 7). Erasing metric choice. At the moment, there are a lot of metrics for assessing the quality of denoising of various types. However, there is no universal one that would accu- rately correspond to the assessment with the naked eye and is well interpreted in all cases [12]. The most suitable for our task was the FSIM metric, which uses the structure of the Fourier components of the image. However, on a large number of examples (including those provided to you in the Fig. 5), it was noticed that the difference in metric between the base model and the model with the proposed trainable layer should have a larger gap, since ﬁlling the inside of the cropped rectangle has greater importance than just averag- ing. Our experiments with other metrics, such as PSNR, present a sound but still sub-optimal alternative. 6. Conclusions The method proposed in our work proved to be efﬁcient on all datasets and all classical model architectures that we have considered. In all cases, the use of simple adaptive frequency ﬁltering layer has led to faster convergence of the training process than in the case of the stand-alone model, having shown higher segmentation quality both on train and on test samples. A rather important ﬁnding is the increase of Dice score for the case of simple U-Net by around 10% when the adaptive global ﬁlter is added. This promises an opportunity for the areas, such as medicine, where getting marked data is an acknowledged challenge, causing one to attempt learning on small datasets. In these cases, the use of heavy models with a large number of parameters is one possible solution which frequently leads to a fast overﬁt; whereas, addition of simple adaptive ﬁltering layers “trims” unnecessary frequencies in the Fourier domain and makes the model learn only the vital frequencies along with the weights of the main neural network. All of this is accom- plished while optimizing the targeted advantage function of interest to a particular application (e.g. , Dice score or F1- score). We believe the proposed layer can be a good add-on for a number of powerful modern preprocessing tools, includ- ing those that exist in various AutoML pipelines [11]. In fact, there are many recently devised methods of augmenta- tion and data preprocessing (e.g., see [8]) that still await for frequency ﬁltering capability. The convergence speed of models plays an important role too. Areas, such as ultrasound imaging, entail big amounts of data, the labelling of which takes a lot of time and requires the involvement of highly qualiﬁed experts. Due to this, in CV is relevant task of active learning [37], which implies the further retraining of models. Same ap- plies to tasks which entail unsupervised segmentation [4]. Initially, we anticipated that our adaptive layer would im- prove convergence and quality primarily in the ultrasound data (the echogenic nature of which is known to be prone to high sensitivity to the frequency knobs). But we were surprised to ﬁnd out the improvement in the natural images as well. This expands the possible areas of application of the proposed approach and opens up a new direction of re- search of adaptive layers (e.g. ,in more complex multi-layer architectures [10], in generative and image translation mod- els [32], in learnable frequency kernels [23], in iterative anomaly detection models [41], etc.. Lightening of these models via a simple adaptive ﬁltering layer holds potential for a seamless integration in various CV applications.). 7. Acknowledgements We thank Nazar Buzun for helpful discussions. References [1] https://www.kaggle.com/c/ ultrasound-nerve-segmentation/data. 4 [2] https://www.kaggle.com/c/dogs-vs-cats/ data. 4 [3] Walid Al-Dhabyani, Mohammed Gomaa, Hussien Khaled, and Aly Fahmy. Dataset of breast ultrasound images. Data in Brief, 28:104863, 11 2019. 4 [4] Iaroslav Bespalov, Nazar Buzun, and Dmitry V Dylov. Brul´e: Barycenter-regularized unsupervised landmark ex- traction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11643, 2020. 8 [5] J.M. Blackledge. Digital Image Processing: Mathematical and Computational Methods. 11 2005. 3 [6] Sing-Tze Bow. Pattern Recognition and Image Preprocess- ing. Marcel Dekker, Inc., USA, 2nd edition, 2002. 1 [7] Steven Brunton and J. Kutz. Data-Driven Science and Engi- neering: Machine Learning, Dynamical Systems, and Con- trol. 01 2019. 3 [8] Alexander Buslaev, Vladimir I. Iglovikov, Eugene Khved- chenya, Alex Parinov, Mikhail Druzhinin, and Alexandr A. Kalinin. Albumentations: Fast and ﬂexible image augmen- tations. Information, 11(2):125, Feb 2020. 3, 8 [9] Vikas Chaudhary and Shahina Bano. Thyroid ultrasound. Indian journal of endocrinology and metabolism, 17:219– 27, 03 2013. 2 [10] Aritra Chowdhury, Dmitry V Dylov, Qing Li, Michael MacDonald, Dan E Meyer, Michael Marino, and Alberto Santamaria-Pang. Blood vessel characterization using virtual 3d models and convolutional neural networks in ﬂuorescence microscopy. pages 629–632. IEEE, 2017. 2, 8 [11] Ekin D. Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay Va- sudevan, and Quoc V. Le. Autoaugment: Learning augmen- tation policies from data. 2019. 8 [12] Keyan Ding, Kede Ma, Shiqi Wang, and Eero P. Simon- celli. Comparison of Image Quality Models for Optimiza- tion of Image Processing Systems. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:2005.01338, May 2020. 8 [13] Diana F Gordon and Marie Desjardins. Evaluation and Se- lection of Biases in Machine Learning. Machine Learning, 20(1):5–22, 1995. 3 [14] Yanming Guo, Yu Liu, Ard Oerlemans, Songyang Lao, Song Wu, and Michael S. Lew. Deep learning for visual under- standing: A review. Neurocomputing, 187:27 – 48, 2016. Recent Developments on Deep Big Vision. 1 [15] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385, 2015. 1, 4 [16] Yaoshiang Ho and Samuel Wookey. The real-world-weight cross-entropy loss function: Modeling the costs of mislabel- ing. IEEE Access, PP:1–1, 12 2019. 5 [17] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Densely connected convolutional networks. CoRR, abs/1608.06993, 2016. 1, 4 [18] Huimin Huang, Lanfen Lin, Ruofeng Tong, Hongjie Hu, Zhang Qiaowei, Yutaro Iwamoto, Xian-Hua Han, Yen-Wei Chen, and Jian Wu. Unet 3+: A full-scale connected unet for medical image segmentation. 04 2020. 1 [19] Barys Ihnatsenka and Andre Boezaart. Ultrasound: Basic understanding and learning the language. International jour- nal of shoulder surgery, 4:55–62, 07 2010. 2, 4 [20] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International Conference on Learn- ing Representations, 12 2014. 4 [21] Reinhard Klette. Concise Computer Vision: An Introduction into Theory and Algorithms. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2014. 3 [22] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Computer Science Department, University of Toronto, Tech. Rep, 1, 01 2009. 4 [23] Elizaveta Lazareva, Oleg Rogov, Olga Shegai, Denis Lari- onov, and Dmitry V Dylov. Learnable hollow kernels for anatomical segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05103, 2020. 8 [24] Y. Le and X. Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition chal- lenge. 2015. 4 [25] Jianghong Li, Liang Chen, and Yuanhu Cai. Dynamic tex- ture segmentation using fourier transform. Modern Applied Science, 3, 08 2009. 2 [26] Jinhua Lin, Lin Ma, and Yu Yao. A fourier domain training framework for convolutional neural networks based on the fourier domain pyramid pooling method and fourier domain exponential linear unit. IEEE Access, PP:1–1, 08 2019. 2 [27] Pengju Liu, Hongzhi Zhang, Kai Zhang, Liang Lin, and Wangmeng Zuo. Multi-level wavelet-cnn for image restora- tion. CoRR, abs/1805.07071, 2018. 2 [28] Michael T McCann, Kyong Hwan Jin, and Michael Unser. Convolutional neural networks for inverse problems in imag- ing: A review. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(6):85– 95, 2017. 1 [29] Fausto Milletari, Nassir Navab, and Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi. V-net: Fully convolutional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation. 06 2016. 4 [30] Ozan Oktay, Jo Schlemper, Lo¨ıc Le Folgoc, Matthew C. H. Lee, Mattias P. Heinrich, Kazunari Misawa, Kensaku Mori, Steven G. McDonagh, Nils Y. Hammerla, Bernhard Kainz, Ben Glocker, and Daniel Rueckert. Attention u-net: Learn- ing where to look for the pancreas. CoRR, abs/1804.03999, 2018. 1 [31] H. Pratt, B. M. Williams, F. Coenen, and Yalin Zheng. Fcnn: Fourier convolutional neural networks. ECML/PKDD, 2017. 2 [32] Denis Prokopenko, Jo¨el Valentin Stadelmann, Heinrich Schulz, Steffen Renisch, and Dmitry V Dylov. Unpaired synthetic image generation in radiology using gans. pages 94–101. Springer, Cham, 2019. 8 [33] Waseem Rawat and Zenghui Wang. Deep convolutional neu- ral networks for image classiﬁcation: A comprehensive re- view. Neural Computation, 29(9):2352–2449, 2017. PMID: 28599112. 1 [34] M. Rhu, N. Gimelshein, J. Clemons, A. Zulﬁqar, and S. W. Keckler. vdnn: Virtualized deep neural networks for scal- able, memory-efﬁcient neural network design. In 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi- tecture (MICRO), pages 1–13, 2016. 1 [35] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. CoRR, abs/1505.04597, 2015. 1, 4 [36] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Outra- geously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture- of-experts layer, 2017. 1 [37] Artem Shelmanov, Vadim Liventsev, Danil Kireev, Nikita Khromov, Alexander Panchenko, Irina Fedulova, and Dmitry V Dylov. Active learning with deep pre-trained mod- els for sequence tagging of clinical and biomedical texts. pages 482–489. IEEE, 2019. 8 [38] Junho Song, Young Jun Chai, Hiroo Masuoka, Sun-Won Park, Su-jin Kim, June Choi, Hyoun-Joong Kong, Kyu Eun Lee, Joongseek Lee, Nojun Kwak, Ka Yi, and Akira Miyauchi. Ultrasound image analysis using deep learning algorithm for the diagnosis of thyroid nodules. Medicine, 98:e15133, 04 2019. 2 [39] Richard Szeliski. Computer vision algorithms and applica- tions. Springer, London; New York, 2011. 1, 2, 3 [40] Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ra- mamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimen- sional domains. 06 2020. 2 [41] Nina Tuluptceva, Bart Bakker, Irina Fedulova, Heinrich Schulz, and Dmitry V Dylov. Anomaly detection with deep perceptual autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13265, 2020. 9 [42] C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 Dataset. Technical Re- port CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011. 4 [43] Lei Wang, Shujian Yang, Shan Yang, Cheng Zhao, Guangye Tian, Yuxiu Gao, Yongjian Chen, and Yun Lu. Automatic thyroid nodule recognition and diagnosis in ultrasound imag- ing with the yolov2 neural network. World Journal of Surgi- cal Oncology, 17, 12 2019. 2 [44] Yanchao Yang and Stefano Soatto. Fda: Fourier domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. 04 2020. 2 [45] Kai Zhang, Wangmeng Zuo, Yunjin Chen, Deyu Meng, and Lei Zhang. Beyond a gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep cnn for image denoising. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, PP, 08 2016. 5 [46] Kai Zhang, Wangmeng Zuo, Yunjin Chen, Deyu Meng, and Lei Zhang. Beyond a Gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep CNN for image denoising. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 26(7):3142–3155, 2017. 1 [47] Lin Zhang, Lei Zhang, Xuanqin Mou, and David Zhang. Fsim: A feature similarity index for image quality assess- ment. Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 20:2378 – 2386, 09 2011. 1, 5 [48] Hang Zhao, Orazio Gallo, Iuri Frosio, and Jan Kautz. Loss functions for image restoration with neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging, PP:1–1, 12 2016. 5 [49] Zhun Zhong, Liang Zheng, Guoliang Kang, Shaozi Li, and Yi Yang. Random erasing data augmentation. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 34, 08 2017. 5 [50] Zongwei Zhou, Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee, Nima Tajbakhsh, and Jianming Liang. Unet++: A nested u- net architecture for medical image segmentation. CoRR, abs/1807.10165, 2018. 1 [51] Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang. Unet++: Redesigning skip connections to exploit multiscale features in image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Med- ical Imaging, 39(6):1856–1867, 2020. 1 [52] Wangmeng Zuo, Kai Zhang, and Lei Zhang. Convolutional neural networks for image denoising and restoration. De- noising of Photographic Images and Video: Fundamentals, Open Challenges and New Trends, pages 93–123, 2018. 1 Supplemental material 8. Datasets Description A more exhaustive description of the datasets (Fig. 8) from the main text, follows below. Figure 8. Examples of BPUI, Caltech Birds (2011), BUSI, Dogs vs. Cats (columns from left to right) datasets associated with the considered computer vision tasks. We validate efﬁciency of our adaptive layer on two med- ical and on four natural image benchmarks. The ultrasound data is collected by receiving the echo signal reﬂected from the surfaces of tissues of different den- sity. Depending on the echogenicity (the ability to reﬂect or transmit ultrasound waves), different types of structures can be distinguished in the scans: hyper-echoic (white re- gions on the scan), hypo-echoic (gray regions on the scan), or an-echoic (black regions on the scan). For example, the muscles are hypo-echoic with a striated structure, and the nerves are hyper-echoic with the stippled structure. Natural images represent a separate class of images be- cause they are collected by regular cameras. Breast Ultrasound Images (BUSI) dataset contains medical ultrasound images of breast cancer for different fe- male patients, along with the ground truth masks. The data was collected to address the problem of classiﬁcation, de- tection, and segmentation of breast cancer, one of the most common causes of death in women worldwide. All images are divided into three classes: normal, benign tumor, and malignant tumor. Brachial Plexus Ultrasound Images (BPUI) dataset is intended for the task of segmentation of the anatomical networks, formed by the anterior branches of the four lower cervical nerves and the ﬁrst thoracic nerve, called the brachial plexus. Localization of the nerve structures on the ultrasound scans is an important step in the clinical prac- tice. The dataset contains both the images with the plexus and without, as well as the ground truth masks. Caltech Birds (CUB 200 2011) dataset provides pho- tographs of 200 different bird species, organized by the classes. Annotations, obtained as the medians over the pix- els indicated by 5 different users per image, include the bounding boxes and the segmentation labels. Therefore, for the scope of our work, only the main core contours of the annotation labels are referred to as the ground truth masks. Dogs vs. Cats dataset consists of a set of 25 thousand im- ages of cats and dogs with a class label. There is a tremen- dous diversity in the photos (for instance, a wide variety of backgrounds, angles, poses, lighting), causing difﬁculties for building a proper automatic classiﬁcation model. CIFAR-10 dataset consists of 50,000 images for train- ing and 10,000 images for the test, size 32 × 32, which are uniformly distributed over 10 classes: airplane, automobile, bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse, ship, truck. Each picture includes only one leading instance of a certain class which can be viewed from an unusual point of view. Tiny ImageNet dataset has images of 200 different classes (500 in each) with a size of 64 × 64, as well as 50 validation images for each class. 9. Spectrum and Phase adjustment Spectrum. We look for a global ﬁlter that will leave only those frequencies that improve the prediction of the base model. A high-pass ﬁlter, in which high frequencies are passed and low frequencies are suppressed, enhances edges. While visualizing details with a low-pass ﬁlter reduces out- liers and contrast, i.e., yielding a smoothing effect. For each task, one needs a speciﬁc ﬁlter, which is not easy to select manually (Fig. 9). Therefore, we can delegate the task of ﬁl- ter selection to the computer by integrating the appropriate adaptive neural layer for global frequency ﬁltering, which will be trained alongside the main model. Phase. We also looked at the phase adjustment, namely, the rotation of each frequency by the trainable angle. The weight matrix remains exactly the same size as in the Lin- ear conﬁguration, but now each weight encodes the angle for which the rotation operator is constructed for each fre- quency: f g  kl ←−Rwkl f g  kl = cos wkl −sin wkl sin wkl cos wkl  f g  kl where fkl + jgkl is kl-th frequency in the Fourier trans- formed image, wkl is kl-th weight in trainable weight ma- trix W. The results of such a learning adjustment can be seen in the Figures 10, 11, 12 for segmentation, classiﬁca- tion, denoising and erasing experiments, respectively. Figure 9. Motivation elaborated. Different frequency ﬁlters applied to the initial ultrasonic image (top left) and their Fourier spectra. Notice the effect of high-pass/low-pass components on morphology and texture. 10. Segmentation Models Description Segmentation models have been selected among the fol- lowing popular ones: • U-Net - the ﬁrst successful architecture in biomedical image segmentation, in that rich feature representation combines lower-level image one using skip connec- tions. • A model with DenseNet encoder, which contains shorter connections between layers close to the input and those close to the output for more accurate and ef- ﬁcient training. • A model with ResNet encoder, where the layers are reformulated as learning residual functions regarding the layer inputs, instead of learning the unreferenced functions. 11. Activation Functions The Table 4 contains the results of the study of the ac- tivation function inﬂuence in the General conﬁguration of the adaptive layer for medical datasets. Figure 10. CONTROL AND LARGE-SCALE EXPERIMENTS. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on BUSI (top) and Caltech Birds (bottom) validation sets. Table 4. Validation Dice score for different activation functions on the BUSI and BPUI datasets in the General conﬁguration of the adaptive layer. Red color font corresponds to the worst score, and green font corresponds to the best score. Activation Function BUSI BPUI U-Net DenseNet ResNet U-Net DenseNet ResNet Sigmoid 0.70 0.82 0.83 0.68 0.75 0.72 ReLU 0.77 0.84 0.83 0.75 0.77 0.75 ReLU6 0.76 0.83 0.81 0.73 0.76 0.74 Softplus 0.74 0.83 0.82 0.70 0.75 0.74 Tanh 0.75 0.83 0.83 0.73 0.76 0.74 Swish (β = 1.0) 0.78 0.81 0.80 0.74 0.76 0.75 Mish 0.78 0.83 0.82 0.75 0.77 0.75 Figure 11. CONTROL AND LARGE-SCALE EXPERIMENTS. Loss functions and Accuracy score of different models training processes on CIFAR-10 (top) and Tiny ImageNet (bottom) validation sets. Figure 12. CONTROL AND LARGE-SCALE EXPERIMENTS. Loss functions and PSNR metric of different models training processes for Gaussian denoising (top) and erasing corruption (bottom) problems on BUSI validation set. 12. Additional Learning Process Results As extra information, we provide visualiza- tion of learning processes for segmentation (Fig- ures 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20), classiﬁcation (Figures 21, 22), denoising (Fig. 23) and erasing (Fig- ures 24, 25) tasks. Figure 13. SEGMENTATION. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on BUSI train set. Figure 14. SEGMENTATION. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on BUSI validation set. Figure 15. SEGMENTATION. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on BPUI train set. Figure 16. SEGMENTATION. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on BPUI validation set. Figure 17. SEGMENTATION. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on Caltech Birds (2011) train set. Figure 18. SEGMENTATION. Loss functions and Dice coefﬁcients of different models training processes on Caltech Birds (2011) validation set. Figure 19. SEGMENTATION. Example of trainable ﬁlter application to mask area. Initial image, Linear ﬁlter, General ﬁlter, General log ﬁlter. Figure 20. SEGMENTATION. Frequency difference of ‘learnt’ ﬁlters (left to right: Linear, General, General log) with the initial spectrum. Figure 21. CLASSIFICATION. Loss functions and F1-scores of different models training processes on BUSI train (left column) and valida- tion (right column) sets for normal vs. benign, benign vs. malignant and normal vs. malignant class pairs correspondingly. Figure 22. CLASSIFICATION. Loss functions and F1-scores of different models training processes on Dogs vs. Cats train (left column) and validation (right column) sets. Figure 23. DENOISING. Loss functions and PSNR, SSIM, FSIM metrics of different models training processes on BUSI train (left column) and validation (right column) sets. Figure 24. ERASING. Loss functions and PSNR, SSIM, FSIM metrics of different models training processes on BUSI train (left column) and validation (right column) sets. Figure 25. ERASING. Loss functions and PSNR, SSIM, FSIM metrics of different models training processes on Dogs vs. Cats train (left column) and validation (right column) sets.