Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination Malika Nisal Ratnayake1*, Don Chathurika Amarathunga1, Asaduz Zaman1, Adrian G. Dyer2,3 and Alan Dorin1 1Computational and Collective Intelligence Group, Dept. of Data Science and AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Melbourne, 3800, Victoria, Australia. 2School of Media and Communication, RMIT University, La Trobe Street, Melbourne, 3000, Victoria, Australia. 3Department of Physiology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Melbourne, 3800, Victoria, Australia. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): malika.ratnayake@monash.edu; Contributing authors: don.amarathunga@monash.edu; asaduzzaman@monash.edu; adrian.dyer@rmit.edu.au, adrian.dyer@monash.edu; alan.dorin@monash.edu; Abstract Insects are the most important global pollinator of crops and play a key role in maintaining the sustain- ability of natural ecosystems. Insect pollination monitoring and management are therefore essential for improving crop production and food security. Computer vision facilitated pollinator monitoring can intensify data collection over what is feasible using manual approaches. The new data it gener- ates may provide a detailed understanding of insect distributions and facilitate ﬁne-grained analysis suﬃcient to predict their pollination eﬃcacy and underpin precision pollination. Current computer vision facilitated insect tracking in complex outdoor environments is restricted in spatial coverage and often constrained to a single insect species. This limits its relevance to agriculture. Therefore, in this article we introduce a novel system to facilitate markerless data capture for insect counting, insect motion tracking, behaviour analysis and pollination prediction across large agricultural areas. Our system is comprised of edge computing multi-point video recording, oﬄine automated multi- species insect counting, tracking and behavioural analysis. We implement and test our system on a commercial berry farm to demonstrate its capabilities. Our system successfully tracked four insect varieties, at nine monitoring stations within polytunnels, obtaining an F-score above 0.8 for each variety. The system enabled calculation of key metrics to assess the relative pollination impact of each insect variety. With this technological advancement, detailed, ongoing data collection for preci- sion pollination becomes achievable. This is important to inform growers and apiarists managing crop pollination, as it allows data-driven decisions to be made to improve food production and food security. Keywords: deep learning, camera trapping, honeybees, pollination, food security, insect tracking 1 arXiv:2205.04675v2 [cs.CV] 11 Nov 2022 2 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 1 Introduction Pollinators play a key role in world food produc- tion and ecosystem management. Three out of four ﬂowering plants (Food & Agriculture Orga- nization of the United Nation, 2019) and 35% of agricultural land (FAO, 2018) require some degree of animal pollination. This includes over 87 high-value food crops consumed by humans (Aizen, Garibaldi, Cunningham, & Klein, 2009). The annual market value of pollinator contribu- tions to global food production is estimated to be in the range of 235−577 billion USD (Potts et al., 2016). Recently, climate change and other anthro- pogenic pressures have been implicated in declines in some pollinator populations (Schweiger et al., 2010; Vanbergen & Initiative, 2013), threatening global food security. In many instances, pollina- tor population size is directly correlated with crop yield (Rollin & Garibaldi, 2019), although the eﬃ- ciency of diﬀerent pollinator populations varies between crops (MacInnis & Forrest, 2019). Hence, improved understanding and management of pol- linator communities is important to boost crop yield (Garibaldi, Requier, Rollin, & Andersson, 2017), and for the long-term viability of many farming projects (Garibaldi, S´aez, Aizen, Fijen, & Bartomeus, 2020). This need strongly motivates the research presented here to describe the design and implementation of computer vision facilitated spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis for precision pollination. Insect monitoring and sampling can help us to understand diﬀerent insect species’ roles in crop and other ﬂowering plant pollination. Traditional methods of insect monitoring are straightforward to conduct but are time-consuming and labour intensive. The use of human labour for traditional sampling may unintentionally bias results (Den- nis et al., 2006; Simons & Chabris, 1999), increase processing lead times, reduce reproducibility, and inhibit or interfere with active pollination moni- toring conducted simultaneously in diﬀerent areas of a site. Furthermore, conventional sampling methods lack functional precision – the capacity to model pollinator movements, motion paths and spatial distributions. This restricts their value as a means to understand how insect behaviour eﬀects pollination. Automated and detailed pollination monitoring techniques with high functional preci- sion are needed that allow continuous assessment of pollination levels. Mechanised eﬀorts to count insects have been attempted and improved over the last century, although it is only with improved technology and Artiﬁcial Intelligence that indi- vidual recognition in complex environments has started to emerge as a realistic proposition (Ode- mer, 2022). In turn, this will facilitate the eﬃcient management of pollinator resources as agriculture increasingly embraces data-driven, AI-enhanced technology (Abdel-Raziq, Palmer, Koenig, Mol- nar, & Petersen, 2021; Breeze et al., 2021; Howard, Nisal Ratnayake, Dyer, Garcia, & Dorin, 2021). Improvement in sensor technology has enabled the use of inexpensive Internet of Things (IoT) devices, such as cameras and miniature insect- mounted sensors, for pollination monitoring. Insect-mounted sensors allow movement tracking of tagged insects over large areas (Abdel-Raziq et al., 2021). However, the technique is unsuit- able for agriculture since tagging is laborious, it may increase insect stress or alter behaviour (Bat- sleer et al., 2020), and it is simply impractical on a large enough scale to be relevant in this context. Camera-based pollination monitoring can overcome these drawbacks by tracking untagged insects using computer vision and deep learning (Howard et al., 2021; Ratnayake, Dyer, & Dorin, 2021a). In this research, we introduce a novel com- puter vision system to facilitate pollination mon- itoring for large-scale agriculture. Our system is comprised of edge computing multi-point remote capture of unmarked insect video footage, auto- mated oﬄine multi-species motion tracking, as well as insect counting and behavioural analy- sis. We implemented and tested our methods on a commercial berry farm to (i) track individ- ual movements of multiple varieties of unmarked insect, (ii) count insects, (iii) monitor their ﬂower visitation behaviour, and (iv) analyse contribu- tions of diﬀerent species to pollination. Along with this article we publish the monitoring software, a dataset of over 2000 insect tracks of four insect classes, and an annotated dataset of images from the four classes. We believe that these will serve as a benchmark for future research in precision pollination, a new and important area of precision agriculture. Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 3 The remainder of the paper is organised as fol- lows. In Section 2 we present a brief overview of related work concerning computer vision for insect tracking in the wild. Section 3 presents our new methods and their implementation. In section 4 we describe experiments to evaluate the perfor- mance of our approach and present the results of a pollination analysis to demonstrate our methods’ application. In Section 5 we discuss the strengths and limitations of our approach and suggest future work. Section 6 concludes the paper. 2 Related Work Recently there has been an increase in the use of computer vision and deep learning in agriculture (Kamilaris & Prenafeta-Bold´u, 2018; Odemer, 2022). This has been prominent in land cover clas- siﬁcation (Lu et al., 2017), fruit counting (Afonso et al., 2020), yield estimation (Koirala, Walsh, Wang, & McCarthy, 2019), weed detection (Su, Kong, Qiao, & Sukkarieh, 2021), beneﬁcial and insect pest monitoring (Amarathunga, Grundy, Parry, & Dorin, 2021), and insect tracking and behavioural analysis (Høye et al., 2021). Applica- tions of insect tracking and behavioural analysis algorithms are usually conﬁned to controlled envi- ronments such as laboratories (Branson, Robie, Bender, Perona, & Dickinson, 2009; Haalck, Mangan, Webb, & Risse, 2020; P´erez-Escudero, Vicente-Page, Hinz, Arganda, & De Polavieja, 2014; Walter & Couzin, 2021), and semi-controlled environments such as at beehive entrances (Camp- bell, Mummert, & Sukthankar, 2008; Magnier et al., 2019; Yang, Collins, & Beckerleg, 2018). In these situations, image backgrounds and illumina- tion under which insects are tracked vary only a little, simplifying automated detection and track- ing tasks. Pollination monitoring of crops however, may require tracking unmarked insects outdoors in uncontrolled environments subjected to vege- tation movement caused by the wind, frequent illumination shifts, and movements of tracked and non-target animals. These environmental changes, combined with the complexity of insect movement under such variable conditions, increases the dif- ﬁculty of the tracking problem. Recent studies attempted to address these issues through in-situ insect monitoring algorithms (Bjerge, Mann, & Høye, 2021; Bjerge, Nielsen, Sepstrup, Helsing- Nielsen, & Høye, 2021), but were limited in the spatiotemporal resolution required for eﬃcient pollination monitoring. To overcome the diﬃculties listed above, we previously presented a Hybrid Detection and Tracking (HyDaT) algorithm (Ratnayake, Dyer, & Dorin, 2021b) and a Polytrack algorithm (Rat- nayake et al., 2021a) to track multiple unmarked insects in uncontrolled conditions. The HyDaT algorithm uses a hybrid detection model consisting of a deep learning-based object detection model (YOLOv2 (Redmon & Farhadi, 2017)) and a fore- ground/background segmentation-based detection model (K-nearest neighbours (Zivkovic & Van Der Heijden, 2006)) to track individual insects. In HyDaT, the deep learning object detection is used to detect insects at their ﬁrst appearance in the frame. The foreground/background segmentation is used to detect insects’ position in subsequent frames, provided that there are no multiple detec- tions in the foreground. If the environment is too dynamic and the foreground/background segmen- tation cannot accurately identify the position of the insect, the deep learning model is used for the detection. This enables tracking unmarked and free-ﬂying insects amidst the changes in the envi- ronment. The Polytrack algorithm (Ratnayake et al., 2021a) extended methods in HyDaT to track multiple insects simultaneously. In addition, Poly- track includes a low resolution mode to improve its video processing speed. Although previous algorithms enable track- ing unmarked and free-ﬂying insects amidst the changes in the environment, they are limited to one species and one study location at a time. To gain a sophisticated understanding of agricultural pollination, these constraints are limiting since analysis of the behaviour of multiple insect species that contribute simultaneously, in multiple loca- tions, to overall pollination levels or deﬁciencies is important (Garibaldi et al., 2020; Rader et al., 2016). Currently there is no computer vision facili- tated system, or any other practical system, capa- ble of achieving this goal. In addition, no previous method can identify and classify insect pollination behaviour across large-scale industrial agricultural areas at a level of detail that permits sub-site- speciﬁc interventions to increase farm yield via improved pollination. 4 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 3 Methods and Implementation In this section, we explain the methods and imple- mentation of our insect and pollination monitoring system. An overview of the proposed methodology is shown in Fig. 1. 3.1 Multi-point remote video capture Video footage of freely foraging, unmarked insects required for insect tracking and behavioural anal- ysis was collected using edge computing-based remote camera trap devices built on the Raspberry Pi single board computer. We used a Raspberry Pi 4 and Raspberry Pi camera v2 (Sony IMX219 8-megapixel sensor) because it is widely avail- able, customisable, there’s a wide range of plug-in sensors, and it is suﬃciently low-cost for repli- cation across a large area (Jolles, 2021). Videos are recorded at 1920 × 1080 resolution at 30fps, which is the maximum possible frame-rate for 1920 × 1080 resolution on our devices. The sys- tem is powered using a 20000mAh battery bank. However, we do not process videos to track polli- nators in situ since the Raspberry Pi is currently incapable of processing high quality videos in real- time, and our key goals required detection of insects. Reducing the video resolution or the cap- ture frame-rate to compensate for the lack of speed of the device is not currently feasible within the limitations imposed by pollinator insect speed and size. Video recording units were distributed across nine data collection points in an experimental site (section 3.4 below) and were programmed to con- tinuously record sets of footage clips of 10 minutes duration. The caption of each video clip contained metadata on camera location, recording date and recording time. (Refer to code availability for the software used in the video recording unit.) 3.2 Automated multi-species insect tracking We processed the videos captured remotely using an oﬄine automated video processing algorithm. Since food crops are usually grown in uncon- trolled or semi-controlled environments subject to changes in illumination and foliage movement caused by wind and/or insect and human activity, robust tracking of insects and ﬂowers is essen- tial for accurate pollination and insect behavioural analysis. Here, we build on methods presented in HyDaT (Ratnayake et al., 2021b) and Poly- track (Ratnayake et al., 2021a) algorithms to develop an automated algorithm to track multi- ple insect varieties simultaneously and detail their interactions with ﬂowers. Our algorithm uses a hybrid detection model (adopted from HyDaT (Ratnayake et al., 2021b)) consisting of a YOLOv4 (Bochkovskiy, Wang, & Liao, 2020) deep learning- based object detection model and a K-nearest neighbours (Zivkovic & Van Der Heijden, 2006) foreground/background segmentation model to detect and identify insects in videos. Detected insect positions are formed into a coherent tra- jectory using the methods proposed in Polytrack (Ratnayake et al., 2021a). This includes a low- resolution processing mode that rapidly processes videos when no insects are being tracked. In addi- tion, we introduce two novel algorithms to track ﬂowers and identify insect-ﬂower interactions that enable insect behaviour analysis. In the following sections we present the technical details of our methods. At the start of processing each video sequence, our algorithm extracts the time and location at which the video was captured from the sequence’s embedded metadata. Next, the video is processed to track movement of insects and their interac- tions with ﬂowers. Pilot research revealed that the position of each respective ﬂower being recorded varies throughout a day due to wind and farm management activities, and ﬂowers may physically move termed heliotropism in some cases to track sunlight (Kevan, 1975; van der Kooi, Kevan, & Koski, 2019). Therefore, it is essential to track ﬂower position within the frame to reliably iden- tify insect-ﬂower interactions. The positions of all visible ﬂowers are detected and recorded at the start of a video sequence using the deep learning- based object detector in the hybrid detection model. The deep learning model was preferred for the ﬂower detection over a segmentation model as it can be extended to detect and identify diﬀer- ent types of ﬂowers in the frame. Flower positions are updated in predeﬁned user-speciﬁed intervals. In the current implementation an update inter- val of 100 seconds is used. A “predict and detect” approach is used to track ﬂower movement. The predicted next position of each ﬂower is initially Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 5 Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed methodology identical to its current position, since the magni- tude of ﬂower movement within a short interval (e.g., ≈100seconds) is assumed to be small. We then used the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) to associate the predicted position of each ﬂower to a ﬂower detection in order to form a continuous ﬂower movement track. If a ﬂower being tracked is undetected in a given frame, the last detected position is carried forward. If a detected ﬂower cannot be assigned to any predictions it is con- sidered to be a new ﬂower. At the end of a video sequence, the ﬁnal positions of ﬂowers and their respective tracks of interacting insects are saved for later pollination analysis and visualisation. When an insect ﬁrst enters the video frame, the deep learning-based object detector of the hybrid detection model detects its position and identi- ﬁes its species. In addition, it saves a snapshot of the insect for (optional human) visual veriﬁ- cation. After detection and identiﬁcation of an insect, it is tracked through subsequent frames using the methods presented in the Polytrack algo- rithm (Ratnayake et al., 2021a). In each frame after the ﬁrst detection of an insect, its position is compared with the position of recorded ﬂowers to identify ﬂower visits. If an insect is detected inside the radius of a ﬂower for more than 5 consecu- tive frames (at 30 fps this ensures it is not ﬂying over the ﬂower at typical foraging ﬂight speeds (Spaethe, Tautz, & Chittka, 2001)), the spatial overlap is stored as a ﬂower visit. The radius of a ﬂower is computed to include its dorsal area and an external boundary threshold. This threshold is incorporated as some insects station themselves outside of a ﬂower while accessing nectar or pollen. Repeat visits to a ﬂower that occur after an inter- mediate visit to another ﬂower are recorded as ﬂower re-visits. When an insect exits the video frame, the corresponding track is analysed to iden- tify whether it originated from a false positive detection made by the deep learning model. If a track has not visited ﬂowers and the length is less than a predeﬁned threshold value (10 pixels ≈minimum radius of a ﬂower), it is considered a false positive. After the veriﬁcation, a ﬁle with data on camera location, time of capture and insect trajectories with ﬂower visitation informa- tion is saved for behavioural analysis. The software and recommended tracking parameter values are available with the source code. 3.3 Insect behaviour analysis We analysed insect ﬂower visiting behaviour using the extracted movement trajectories to infer likely pollination events. This is appropriate since ﬂow- ers have evolved structures that enable visiting insects to conduct pollen dispersal and transfer between ﬂoral reproductive organs for fertilisation of ovules by pollen (Real, 2012). Metrics used to analyse ﬂower visitation behaviour and pollination are presented below. Let S = {s1, s2, ..., s|S|} and F be the set of insects belonging to diﬀerent species (or varieties at any taxonomic level) and the set of ﬂowers in the experimental environment respectively. Here, si = {si 1, si 2, ..., si |si|} denotes the subset of insects in S that belong to the ith species type, and si j is 6 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination the jth insect in si. Here, if an insect exits a video frame (i.e., it ﬂies out of the camera view or under vegetation) and later reappears, it will be counted as a new insect. |.| is the cardinality of a given set – e.g., |S| is the number of species types, |si| is the number of insects belonging to the ith species. • The number of ﬂowers visited by an insect species si is deﬁned as FV (si), where nfsi j is the number of times insect si j of species si visited ﬂower f ∈F. FV (si) = |si| X j=1 X f∈F nfsi j (1) • Total number of visits to a ﬂower f from species si is deﬁned as V F(f, si). V F(f, si) = |si| X j=1 nfsi j (2) • Total number of visits to a ﬂower f is deﬁned as V (f). V (f) = |S| X i=1 |si| X j=1 nfsi j (3) • Number of ﬂowers fertilised with visits from species si is deﬁned as Npol(si), where ˆV is the number of visits required to fully fertilise a ﬂower. Npol(si) = X f∈F [V F(f, si) ≥ˆV ] (4) • Total number of fertilised ﬂowers in a location deﬁned as Npol. Npol = |S| X i=1 X f∈F [V F(f, si) ≥ˆV ] (5) 3.4 Implementation We implemented the proposed spatial monitor- ing and insect behavioural analysis system on the commercial Sunny Ridge farm in Boneo, Victoria, Australia (lat. 38.420942° S, long. 144.890422° E) (Fig. 2a). Sunny Ridge grows strawberries in polytunnels covered with translucent LDPE dif- fusing plastic and in open ﬁelds. We installed remote video recording units over nine data col- lection points in strawberry polytunnels (Fig. 2 b) and manually adjusted camera lenses to focus on strawberry ﬂowers. These data collec- tion points were selected to cover the edges and central regions of the polytunnels because pre- vious studies indicated that edge eﬀects might impact insect movement, foraging behaviour and numbers within polytunnels (Hall, Jones, Roc- chetti, Wright, & Rader, 2020; Howard et al., 2021). Videos were recorded for a period of 6 days (between 8th - 17th March 2021) from 11 : 00am to 4 : 00pm (≈5 hours) to coincide with the key pollination period. The video frames covered an area of ∼700mm× ∼400mm which is the width of a planted strawberry row at the site (Fig. 2d). The strawberry farm uses honeybees as man- aged pollinators but farm management staﬀhad also observed other insects visiting crop ﬂow- ers. We monitored the behaviour of four key insect types, honeybees (Apis mellifera), Syrphi- dae (hover ﬂies), Lepidoptera (moths and butter- ﬂies), and Vespidae (wasps) that actively forage on the farm (Fig. 3). Moths and butterﬂies were treated as a single insect pollinator class (Lepi- doptera) for pollination analysis because of their relatively low numbers. 3.4.1 Training the deep learning model The automated video processing system employs a deep learning model YOLOv4 to detect insects and ﬂowers. We created a custom dataset of 3073 images divided into four classes: (i) hon- eybees/Vespidae (2231/371 instances), (ii) Syr- phidae (204 instances), (iii) Lepidoptera (93 instances), and (iv) strawberry ﬂowers (14050 instances). Honeybees and Vespidae were included in a single Hymenopteran class due to their physical similarities and the diﬃculty of auto- matically distinguishing between them using the low-quality video footage extracted from the basic cameras (discussed further below). The prepared dataset was manually annotated with bounding boxes using the Computer Vision Annotation Tool (Sekachev, Manovich, & Zhavoronkov, 2019). When annotating small insects such as Syrphidae, videos associated with annotation images were carefully referenced to minimise the possibility of false negative annotations. The YOLOv4 model was then trained on this dataset using TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) with a learning rate of 0.001. Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 7 Fig. 2: Implementation of the pollination monitoring system. (a) A map of the Sunny Ridge berry farm (implementation site near the city of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.). Locations of managed honeybee hives are indicated with yellow hexagons. (b) Nine data collection points in strawberry poly- tunnels. (c) Edge computing-based remote video capture units placed over strawberry vegetation. (d) A sample image to indicate the ﬁeld of view captured by a monitoring unit. (The white ruler measures 31 cm end-to-end). The pretrained YOLOv4 model and its evaluation data are available with the software code. 3.4.2 Processing videos We processed all recorded videos to extract insect tracks and insect-ﬂower visiting behaviour using the methods described in Section 3.2. Videos were 8 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 3: Insect pollinator types foraging on the farm. Images of key insect types (a) Apis mel- lifera sp. (Hymenoptera), (b) Syrphidae (Diptera), (c) Lepidoptera, and (d) Vespidae (Hymenoptera) captured using the low-cost edge computing-based remote video recording devices. processed on the MASSIVE high performance computing infrastructure (Goscinski et al., 2014) with Intel Xeon Gold 6150 (2.70 GHz) CPU, 55 GB RAM, NVIDIA Tesla P4 GPU and CentOS Linux (7). 3.4.3 Insect trajectory dataset preparation We post-processed insect tracks extracted from the videos to correct insect type identiﬁcations. Insect type identiﬁcation was performed on mul- tiple still frames of each insect assigned to a motion track. A further step was appended to this process to manually classify Hymenoptera into two separate classes, honeybees and Vespi- dae. As reported above, these insects were initially treated as a single class in training the deep learn- ing model due to the diﬃculty of clearly resolving morphological diﬀerences between them in ﬂight at low video resolution and 30 fps. If the insect type could not be conﬁdently identiﬁed through still images, the insect was classiﬁed based on its movement behaviour after observing the videos (e.g. if the insect visited ﬂowers, it was iden- tiﬁed as a honeybee as opposed to a Vespidae since relevant Vespids are considered in study conditions to be predatory insects (Spencer, Bar- ton, Ripple, & Newsome, 2020)). Trajectories that originated through detections that do not corre- spond to insects were identiﬁed as false positives and removed during this process. 4 Results 4.1 Experimental evaluation We evaluated the performance of our system for extracting the trajectory and ﬂower visitation behaviour of four insect types (Fig. 3). Exper- iments were conducted using a test dataset of 180, 000 frames/100 minutes at 30 frames per sec- ond (comprised of 10 sequential videos of 10 min- utes each). These videos were randomly selected from the set of recordings unused in deep learning model training and captured from diﬀerent poly- tunnel locations (Test video dataset is accessible from Data Availability). We measured the detection accuracy of our algorithm by calculating precision (Equation 6), recall (Equation 7), and Fscore (Equation 8) met- rics (Barreiros, Dantas, Silva, Ribeiro, & Barros, 2021) for tracked insects and ﬂowers. Precision = TruePositive TruePositive + FalsePositive (6) Recall = TruePositive TruePositive + FalseNegative (7) Fscore = 2 × (Recall × Precision) Recall + Precision (8) where, TruePositive is the total number of correctly detected insect positions in a track. A detection was considered correct if the algorithm recorded the position of an insect in an area that was in fact covered by the body of the insect. FalseNegative is the total number of undetected insect positions and FalsePositive is the total Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 9 number of incorrectly detected insect positions in a track. The tracks and ﬂower visits reported by our system were compared against human observa- tions made from the videos for validation as we found no other existing monitoring system against which to compare our software. Test videos were observed by playing them on VLC media player at ×5 speed to record insects and ﬂowers. When an insect appeared in the frame, the video was anal- ysed frame by frame to record its ﬂower visits. An insect landing on the dorsal side of a ﬂower was counted as a ﬂower visitor. Insects that appeared inside the frame of the video for less than 5 frames were ignored since at 30 fps this time is too brief to be likely to have any biological impact on pol- lination. If an insect departed the frame and later reappeared, or if it ﬂew under the foliage and later reappeared, it was considered as a “new” insect. Experimental results related to insect and ﬂower detection are shown in Table 1 and results on ﬂower-visit detection are presented in Table 2. Fig. 4 shows the trajectories of insects recorded in test videos. A detailed description of experimental results is available in Supplementary Information. In our test videos, the proposed algorithm tracked honeybees with a precision of 0.99, a recall of 0.92 and an F-score of 0.95. The insect behavioural analysis component of the algorithm accurately detected 97% of honeybee-ﬂower inter- actions, and 3% of ﬂower interactions were not recorded due to undetected ﬂowers. Test videos comprised six appearances of Syrphidae and the algorithm accurately detected ﬁve of them result- ing in a detection rate of 83%. The algorithm tracked Syrphidae with high precision (1.00), but the recall rate of 0.71 and F-score of 0.81 were lower than that of honeybees. These lower values were due to the frames where the insect was unde- tected (see Discussion). Tracking metrics related to Lepidoptera were similar to that of Syrphi- dae, where the algorithm detected and tracked 75% of Lepidopterans with precision, recall and F- score values of 0.99, 0.71 and 0.81 respectively. It also recorded all Lepidopteran ﬂower interactions. The algorithm detected and tracked all Vespi- dae present in test videos with a precision rate of 1.00. However, the recall rate and the F-score were 0.73 and 0.83, respectively. This was because the video frame rate was too low to track some high-speed Vespidae movements. The proposed algorithm recorded identity swaps (multiple tracks generated by the same insect) for honeybees, Syr- phidae and Lepidoptera. The study results did not contain false positive tracks for any insect type, as the algorithm accurately identiﬁed and discarded tracks that originated from false positive insect detections. The values of the detection evaluation metrics for ﬂowers were high as there was little or no movement of ﬂowers apparent within test videos. 4.2 Insect behavioural analysis for precision pollination We applied our methods to analyse pollination in a commercial berry farm to demonstrate its practical relevance for precision pollination. The dataset for pollination analysis consisted of 1805 honeybees, 85 Syrphidae, 100 Lepidoptera and 345 Vespids. The complete trajectory dataset of insects and ﬂowers is accessible from Data Avail- ability. The distribution of the trajectory lengths is shown in Fig 5. An analysis of the temporal vari- ations in insect counts across the data collection points is shown in Fig. 6. Spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis can help growers quantify pollination across diﬀerent farm areas. We compared pol- lination levels across farm strawberry polytun- nels using insect counts and the number of insect-ﬂower interactions recorded at each loca- tion. Research suggests that a strawberry ﬂower requires a minimum of four insect visits to be fully fertilised (Chagnon, Gingras, & De Oliveira, 1989; Garibaldi et al., 2020). Therefore, the num- ber of insect visits to a ﬂower can be used to predict its pollination level. We used the collected spatial monitoring data to identify ﬂowers that received at least four insect visits during the bio- logically relevant data collection period [5 hours] over which our system operated. Analysis results are shown in Fig. 7. Flower-visitation behaviour reﬂects insects’ crop pollination contributions. We quantiﬁed this on the strawberry ﬂowers by calculating the per- centage of ﬂowers that received visits from each insect type. We further analysed insect-ﬂower vis- its to evaluate the pollination eﬃcacy of insect types by calculating the proportion of ﬂowers that received the minimum of four insect visits required 10 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination Table 1: Results of the evaluations of detections for test video dataset. “No. of Obs.” and “Visible Frames” shows the number of insects/ﬂowers and number of frames in which the insect/ﬂower were fully visible as observed through human observations. “Trackletts Generated” shows the number of trackletts generated by the algorithm for each variety. “Track Evaluation” categorises the trackletts generated to TP=True Positive, FN = False Negative, FP = False Positive, and IS = Identity Swaps. Multiple tracks generated by a single insect are considered as Identity Swaps. “Evaluation Metrics” present the average precision, recall and F-score metrics for tracked insects. A detailed description of experimental results is available in Supplementary Information. Insect/ Flower No. of Obs. Visible Frames Trackletts Generated Track Evaluation Evaluation Metrics TP FN FP IS Precision Recall F-score Honeybee 20 16846 23 20 0 0 3 0.99 0.92 0.95 Syrphidae 6 3436 6 5 1 0 1 1.00 0.71 0.81 Lepidoptera 4 3158 5 3 1 0 2 0.99 0.71 0.81 Vespidae 10 589 10 10 0 0 0 1.00 0.73 0.83 Flower∗ 72 179306 68 68 4 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 ∗Flower positions were detected and recorded at 100 second (= 3000 frame) intervals. Fig. 4: Trajectories of insects and ﬂower positions recorded in test videos. Track colour indicates insect variety. The number of tracks recorded for each insect type is shown in the legend in brackets beside insect type. Flower locations are circled in yellow. for fertilisation. Results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 8. At all data collection points, we recorded a higher number of honeybees than other insects (Fig. 7). These insects contributed the most Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 11 Fig. 5: The distribution of recorded track lengths (in seconds) for the four insect types. “N” in the legend shows the total number of tracks recorded for each insect type. Fig. 6: Temporal variation in insect counts. Figure show the frequency of the insects recorded in each hour of the day at each data collection point. “T” and “F” in the title blocks show the total number of tracks and ﬂowers recorded at each location. 12 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination Fig. 7: Results of the spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis for precision polli- nation. Bar charts above the plots indicate the number of tracks, total number of ﬂower visits (actual), total number of ﬂower visits normalised by the recorded number of tracks for each insect type at each location, and number of ﬂowers recorded at each location. Bar colour for tracks and ﬂower visits indicates the proportion of tracks recorded for each insect type. Strawberry ﬂowers typically require four visits for full fertilisation (Chagnon et al., 1989; Garibaldi et al., 2020). The dark grey portion of the ﬂowers’ bar graph shows the number of ﬂowers with over four insect visits. “T” and “F” in the title blocks are the total number of tracks and ﬂowers recorded at each location. Trajectory plots show all insect tracks recorded at each location throughout the data collection period. Track colours represent diﬀerent insect varieties. Flower locations are indicated by yellow circles. Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 13 Table 2: Results of the experimental evalu- ations for ﬂower visit detections for the test video dataset. “Observed Visits” shows the total number of insect visits to ﬂowers counted through human observations. “Visit Detection Evaluation” shows the evaluation of ﬂower visits automatically identiﬁed through the software for tracked insects. TP = True positive, FP = False positive, FN = False-negative. Insect Type Observed Visits Visit Detection Evaluation TP FP FN Honeybee 67 65 0 2∗ Syrphidae 5 4 1 1 Lepidoptera 6 6 1 0 Vespidae 0 0 0 0 ∗Resulted from undetected ﬂower(s). towards achieving the ﬂower-visitation targets required for fertilisation (Fig. 8). The next high- est recorded insect were the Vespids (341 tracks) (Fig. 7). However, Vespids were rarely observed to be visiting ﬂowers – at location 1 we did identify Vespidae ﬂower visits; see Fig. 8. This suggests that Vespids do not contribute much to strawberry pollination. Indeed Vespids may be a predator of other insects (Spencer et al., 2020) and can act to inhibit pollination. We recorded relatively low Lepidopteran and Syrphidae counts in most areas of the farm (Fig. 7). The contribution of these species towards achieving ﬂower-visitor targets required for pollination was observed to be much lower than that of honeybees (Fig. 8). This eﬀect is evident by the low relative frequency with which these insects made successive visits to ﬂowers to meet the four required for optimal fertilisation (Fig. 8). For example, the highest frequency of a non-honeybee pollinator to meet four visits was Lepidoptera at location 9 where less than 15% of ﬂowers achieve this level of pollination; whilst at all locations honeybees signiﬁcantly exceeded this level of pollination performance (Fig. 8). When pollination across all locations is consid- ered, over 68% of the recorded strawberry ﬂowers received the minimum of four insect visits required for fertilisation, and 67% of ﬂowers attained this threshold through honeybee visits alone. This data thus reconﬁrms which insects seem, at least as far as the number of visits is concerned, to contribute the most towards pollination at the site. 5 Discussion and Future Work Insect pollination monitoring can improve our understanding of the behaviour of insects on crops. It can therefore potentially boost crop yield on farms were it not currently heavily constrained by the labour required for manual data collection. In this study, a novel multi-point computer vision- based system is presented to facilitate digital spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis on large scale farms. Our system operates in real- world commercial agricultural environments (Fig. 2) to capture videos of insects, identify them (Fig. 3), and count the number of diﬀerent varieties over large areas (Fig. 7) across time (Fig. 6). Analysis of the insect behavioural data allows comparison of the contributions of diﬀerent insect varieties to crop pollination (Fig. 7 and 8). Here, we dis- cuss the implications of our research for precision pollination. 5.1 Computer vision for insect tracking and behavioural analysis Our methods remove the major constraints imposed by the limitations of human observers for horticultural pollination monitoring and the collection of high-resolution spatiotemporal data (Fig. 7) on insect behaviour. The approach there- fore also paves the way for computer vision and edge computing devices to identify insect species for other entomological and ethological applica- tions. The use of relatively inexpensive Raspberry Pi edge computing devices (Fig. 2) for remote recording provides a high degree of scalability and customisability (Aslanpour et al., 2021; O’Grady, Langton, & O’Hare, 2019) for insect monitoring. However, the limited capabilities of these devices requires manual focusing of cameras, conﬁnes the size of recorded study areas (Fig. 2d) and oﬀers only low frame rates and low quality video. This reduced the system’s ability to detect small Syr- phidae, and resulted in issues with the detection and tracking of fast-moving Vespids (Table 1). In addition, the current implementation continu- ously recorded videos on the Raspberry Pi even when there was no insect in the camera frame. This wastes the limited storage and power capac- ities available on edge computing devices. We 14 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination Fig. 8: Contribution of diﬀerent insect varieties towards strawberry pollination. Bar chart shows percentage of ﬂowers visited by each insect type. The dark grey portion shows the percentage of ﬂowers with over four (number of visits required for strawberry ﬂower fertilisation (Chagnon et al., 1989; Garibaldi et al., 2020)) from each insect type. The red dashed line in the plots show the total percentage of ﬂowers with more than four visits in a location. aim to address this drawback in future work by implementing an in-situ algorithm on the edge- computing device for real-time event processing. It is likely that with the rapid improvement of camera technology, video quality and resolution will overcome current limitations and enhance the accuracy and eﬃciency of our methods. We used a ﬁxed camera setup covering a conﬁned area to record videos (Fig. 2d). This results in a subsampling of insect ﬂower visita- tion and behavioural data. We propose that future research should address this limitation by develop- ing methods to extend study areas using multiple or moving cameras. We applied our new methods to monitor insect pollination behaviour in straw- berry crops. Strawberry ﬂowers bloom within a narrow vertical spatial range and are usually vis- ible from above (Fig. 2d). By contrast, other crops, such as tomatoes or raspberry, grow within complex three-dimensional structures of vines or canes, making overhead camera tracking of insects problematic. Monitoring their behaviour in such three-dimensional crops will require multi-view video capture and three-dimensional tracking, which is currently a highly complex and unsolved challenge. Insect detection is an essential precursor to tracking and monitoring. Our algorithm accu- rately detected honeybees and Vespidae but per- formed relatively poorly on Syrphidae (Table 1). This is because of the relatively small pixel area covered by the insect with our setup (Syrphi- dae covers ≈ 40 ± 10 pixels compared to ≈ 1001 ± 475 pixels for a honeybee) (Fig. 3). Future improvements in cameras and object detection technologies (Stojni´c et al., 2021) will help here. We used a hybrid detection model consisting of a deep learning-based and a segmentation-based Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 15 detection model to detect insects in videos. Using a segmentation-based detection model in tandem reduced the demand for the deep learning model. This helped to achieve F-scores of 0.8 for each variety (Table 1) even when trained with a lim- ited and unbalanced dataset (Ratnayake et al., 2021a, 2021b). Our algorithm uses deep learning to detect and classify insects as they enter the video frame. The results of experimental evalua- tion showed limitations in Lepidopteran detection and visually similar insect detection (i.e. honey- bees, Syrphidae and Vespidae (Fig. 3 and Table 1)). Detection of Lepidopterans was challenging because they sometimes appear similar in shape to foliage and shadows in the environment. Also, both Lepidopterans and Syrphidae rested station- ary on ﬂowers for extended periods, prompting the algorithm to classify them as part of the background. Detection and classiﬁcation of visu- ally similar insects requires a deep learning model trained with large annotated datasets. Although there is a considerable increase in the number of open datasets for animal classiﬁcation (Van Horn et al., 2018), there is an absence of suitable open annotated datasets for insect detection in entomology (Høye et al., 2021). Hence, for the current study, we built a dataset from scratch. However, our dataset was unbalanced, since the number of instances in each class was inﬂuenced by the relative abundance of insects recorded at the site (Wang et al., 2016). We propose that future research should use characteristics of insect behaviour, such as spatial signatures of insect movement, to improve species classiﬁcation tasks (Kirkeby et al., 2021). This will help overcome lim- itations associated with camera quality and deep learning datasets. The insect trajectory and video data we publish with this article oﬀers a starting point for such solutions. We used the extracted insect trajectory data to monitor insect ﬂower visitation behaviour and infer pollination levels. In our analysis, if an insect departed the frame and later reappeared, or if it ﬂew under the foliage and later reappeared, a “new” trajectory was generated. Although this does not aﬀect the ﬂower-visitor counts, our approach could bias trajectory counts for species with diﬀerent behaviours or ﬂight path char- acteristics (e.g., ﬂying under foliage and being occluded, cornering sharply rather than turning smoothly). Our multi-camera system will enable future research on these topics especially when combined with emerging solutions for individual insect identiﬁcation. A classic question in any data sampling is the tradeoﬀbetween focused detail and global con- text. Our multi-point system enables a view of what speciﬁc insect pollinators are doing at ﬂow- ers and also a holistic appraisal of how pollination is enabled across an entire agricultural ﬁeld. This solution can be implemented in a variety of ways by choosing diﬀerent camera lens focal lengths and thus ﬁelds of view, diﬀerent numbers of cameras, and any ﬁeld area, depending upon the resolution required to answer a particular research question. 5.2 Spatial monitoring for precision pollination Spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analy- sis can help growers understand the distribution of pollinators across a farm and their impact on pollination. We quantiﬁed pollination by counting insect numbers and insect-ﬂower interactions (Fig. 7). Farm areas with many ﬂowers and insects will likely yield the most crop if there are a suitable number of insect-ﬂower interactions. Strawberry ﬂowers require at least four insect visits for full fertilisation (Chagnon et al., 1989; Garibaldi et al., 2020). However, it is important to note that crop yield and visitation rates have been observed to have a non-linear relationship (Garibaldi et al., 2020), where higher ﬂower visitation rates can result in lower crop yield (Garibaldi et al., 2020; Rollin & Garibaldi, 2019). Therefore, it is beneﬁ- cial to maintain insect ﬂower visits at an optimum value that depends on the crop type, pollinator species, and environmental conditions (Garibaldi et al., 2020). Although diﬀerent behaviours and morpholo- gies make some insect species more eﬀective polli- nators of some ﬂowers than others, we compared the contribution of diﬀerent insect varieties to strawberry pollination using the number of insect ﬂower visits as a proxy (Fig. 8). The analysis suggests that strawberries can obtain suﬃcient pollination solely from honeybees (Fig. 8), even without the presence of other insects. Whilst non- honeybee insect species do not reach the threshold of four visits for high eﬀectiveness (Fig. 8), it is possible these insects may still contribute to 16 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination pollination (Fig. 7 and 8). Indeed, the absolute volume of insects present may impact how thresh- olds are achieved. Employing the computer vision solutions we share here in diﬀerent environments where insect abundance naturally varies will likely inform researchers about what insects are most beneﬁcial in speciﬁc contexts. In addition, an agricultural system driven by a single pollinator type may not be desirable. Pollinator diversity and associated high ﬂower visitor richness have been shown to aﬀect pollination and crop yield (Garibaldi et al., 2016). Often the high abundance of a single pollinator species cannot be used as a substitute for species richness (Fijen et al., 2018; Garibaldi et al., 2016) as variations in behaviour and foraging inherent to diﬀerent insect species may be important. Compared to manual pollination monitor- ing, our methods provide high-resolution spatio- temporal behavioural data classiﬁed by insect type. Our spatial monitoring results (Fig. 7) can assist farm managers to identify farm areas that require immediate attention in order to maximise fruit set. The temporal analysis of variations in insect counts (Fig. 6) can be used as a guide to understand which duration or sampling fre- quency is necessary for a site to understand pol- linator behaviour. Furthermore, the behavioural pollination contribution analysis (Fig. 8) can pro- vide tools and data to identify eﬃcient pollinator species for a particular crop, enabling data-driven pollination management. Pollination monitoring helps understand the impact of climate change and other anthropogenic activities on insect populations (Settele, Bishop, & Potts, 2016). Recently, climate change and other anthropogenic pressures, including intensive agri- culture, have caused a decline in some pollinator populations (Hallmann et al., 2017; Outhwaite, McCann, & Newbold, 2022; Schweiger et al., 2010; Vanbergen & Initiative, 2013) threatening global food security and terrestrial ecosystem health. The most impacted pollinator populations are native and wild insects that must compete for food with managed pollinators while coping with disease, pollution and habitat loss (Wood et al., 2020). Digital pollination monitoring systems like that described here, provide much-needed data for understanding the impacts of climate change on insect biodiversity and can ultimately provide a sound basis for conservation. 6 Conclusions In this paper, we presented a computer vision facilitated system for spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis to underpin agricul- tural precision pollination. Our system comprised of edge computing-based remote video capture, oﬄine, automated, unmarked multi-species insect tracking, and insect behavioural analysis. The sys- tem tracked four insect types with F-scores above 0.8 when implemented on a commercial straw- berry farm. Analysis of the spatial distribution of ﬂower-visiting behaviour of diﬀerent insect vari- eties across the farm, allowed for the inference of ﬂower fertilisation, and the comparison of insects’ pollination contribution. We determined that 67% of ﬂowers met or exceeded the speciﬁed criteria for reliable pollination through honeybee visits. However, alternative pollinators were less eﬀective at our study site. This advancement of computer vision, spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis, provides pollinator data to growers much more rapidly, broadly and deeply than manual observation. Such rich sources of insect-ﬂower interaction data potentially enable precision polli- nation and pollinator management for large-scale commercial agriculture. Supplementary information. Additional and detailed experimental results on presented meth- ods are available in the Supplementary Informa- tion ﬁle “Supplementary Information.pdf”. Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank Sunny Ridge Australia for the opportunity to conduct research at their farm. Declarations • Funding: Authors were supported by the Aus- tralian Research Council Discovery Projects grant DP160100161 and Monash-Bosch AgTech Launchpad primer grant. This study was funded by AgriFutures grant PRJ-012993. Amarathunga is supported by ARC Research Hub IH180100002. • Competing interests: The authors have no com- peting interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article. • Ethics approval: Not applicable • Consent to participate: Not applicable • Consent for publication: Not applicable Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 17 • Availability of data and materials: The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available in the repository https://doi.org/10.26180/21533760 • Code availability: Code is available through https://github.com/malikaratnayake/ Polytrack2.0 • Authors’ contributions: Conceptualization: Malika Nisal Ratnayake, Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin; Data curation: Malika Nisal Ratnayake; Formal analysis: Malika Nisal Ratnayake; Funding acquisition: Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin; Investigation: Malika Nisal Ratnayake, Don Chathurika Amarathunga, Asaduz Zaman; Methodology: Malika Nisal Ratnayake, Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin; Project administration: Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin; Resources: Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin; Software: Malika Nisal Ratnayake; Supervision: Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin; Validation: Malika Nisal Ratnayake, Don Chathurika Amarathunga; Writing – orig- inal draft: Malika Nisal Ratnayake; Writing – review & editing: Malika Nisal Ratnayake, Don Chathurika Amarathunga, Asaduz Zaman, Adrian G. Dyer, Alan Dorin. References Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., . . . Zheng, X. (2016). Ten- sorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning. Proceedings of the 12th usenix symposium on operating systems design and implementation, osdi 2016 (pp. 265—283). Abdel-Raziq, H.M., Palmer, D.M., Koenig, P.A., Molnar, A.C., Petersen, K.H. (2021). Sys- tem design for inferring colony-level pol- lination activity through miniature bee- mounted sensors. Scientiﬁc reports, 11(1), 1–12. Afonso, M., Fonteijn, H., Fiorentin, F.S., Lensink, D., Mooij, M., Faber, N., . . . Wehrens, R. (2020). Tomato fruit detection and counting in greenhouses using deep learning. Fron- tiers in plant science, 11, 1759. Aizen, M.A., Garibaldi, L.A., Cunningham, S.A., Klein, A.M. (2009). How much does agri- culture depend on pollinators? lessons from long-term trends in crop production. Annals of botany, 103(9), 1579–1588. Amarathunga, D.C.K., Grundy, J., Parry, H., Dorin, A. (2021). Methods of insect image capture and classiﬁcation: A system- atic literature review. Smart Agricultural Technology, 100023. Aslanpour, M.S., Toosi, A.N., Cicconetti, C., Javadi, B., Sbarski, P., Taibi, D., . . . Dust- dar, S. (2021). Serverless edge computing: vision and challenges. 2021 australasian computer science week multiconference (pp. 1–10). Barreiros, M.d.O., Dantas, D.d.O., Silva, L.C.d.O., Ribeiro, S., Barros, A.K. (2021). Zebraﬁsh tracking using yolov2 and kalman ﬁlter. Scientiﬁc reports, 11(1), 1–14. Batsleer, F., Bonte, D., Dekeukeleire, D., Goossens, S., Poelmans, W., Van der Cruyssen, E., . . . Vandegehuchte, M.L. (2020). The neglected impact of tracking devices on terrestrial arthropods. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 11(3), 350–361. Bjerge, K., Mann, H.M., Høye, T.T. (2021). Real- time insect tracking and monitoring with computer vision and deep learning. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation. Bjerge, K., Nielsen, J.B., Sepstrup, M.V., Helsing- Nielsen, F., Høye, T.T. (2021). An auto- mated light trap to monitor moths (lepi- doptera) using computer vision-based track- ing and deep learning. Sensors, 21(2), 343. Bochkovskiy, A., Wang, C.-Y., Liao, H.-Y.M. (2020). Yolov4: Optimal speed and accu- racy of object detection. arXiv preprint 18 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination arXiv:2004.10934. Branson, K., Robie, A.A., Bender, J., Perona, P., Dickinson, M.H. (2009). High-throughput ethomics in large groups of drosophila. Nature methods, 6(6), 451–457. Breeze, T.D., Bailey, A.P., Balcombe, K.G., Brere- ton, T., Comont, R., Edwards, M., . . . oth- ers (2021). Pollinator monitoring more than pays for itself. Journal of Applied Ecology, 58(1), 44–57. Campbell, J., Mummert, L., Sukthankar, R. (2008). Video monitoring of honey bee colonies at the hive entrance. Visual obser- vation & analysis of animal & insect behav- ior, ICPR, 8, 1—4. Chagnon, M., Gingras, J., De Oliveira, D. (1989). Eﬀect of honey bee (hymenoptera: Apidae) visits on the pollination rate of strawberries. Journal of Economic Entomology, 82(5), 1350–1353. Dennis, R., Shreeve, T., Isaac, N., Roy, D., Hardy, P., Fox, R., Asher, J. (2006). The eﬀects of visual apparency on bias in butterﬂy record- ing and monitoring. Biological conservation, 128(4), 486–492. FAO (2018). Why bees matter; the importance of bees and other pollinators for food and agriculture. Fijen, T.P., Scheper, J.A., Boom, T.M., Janssen, N., Raemakers, I., Kleijn, D. (2018). Insect pollination is at least as important for mar- ketable crop yield as plant quality in a seed crop. Ecology letters, 21(11), 1704–1713. Food & Agriculture Organization of the United Nation (2019). Global action on pollination services for sustainable agriculture. Garibaldi, L.A., Carvalheiro, L.G., Vaissi`ere, B.E., Gemmill-Herren, B., Hip´olito, J., Freitas, B.M., . . . others (2016). Mutually ben- eﬁcial pollinator diversity and crop yield outcomes in small and large farms. Science, 351(6271), 388–391. Garibaldi, L.A., Requier, F., Rollin, O., Anders- son, G.K.S. (2017). Towards an integrated species and habitat management of crop pol- lination. Current opinion in insect science, 21, 105—114. Garibaldi, L.A., S´aez, A., Aizen, M.A., Fijen, T., Bartomeus, I. (2020). Crop pollination man- agement needs ﬂower-visitor monitoring and target values. Journal of Applied Ecology, 57(4), 664–670. Goscinski, W.J., McIntosh, P., Felzmann, U.C., Maksimenko, A., Hall, C.J., Gureyev, T., . . . others (2014). The multi-modal australian sciences imaging and visualization environ- ment (massive) high performance computing infrastructure: applications in neuroscience and neuroinformatics research. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 8, 30. Haalck, L., Mangan, M., Webb, B., Risse, B. (2020). Towards image-based animal track- ing in natural environments using a freely moving camera. Journal of neuroscience methods, 330, 108455. Hall, M.A., Jones, J., Rocchetti, M., Wright, D., Rader, R. (2020). Bee visitation and fruit quality in berries under protected crop- ping vary along the length of polytunnels. Journal of Economic Entomology, 113(3), 1337–1346. Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 19 Hallmann, C.A., Sorg, M., Jongejans, E., Sie- pel, H., Hoﬂand, N., Schwan, H., . . . others (2017). More than 75 percent decline over 27 years in total ﬂying insect biomass in pro- tected areas. PloS one, 12(10), e0185809. Howard, S.R., Nisal Ratnayake, M., Dyer, A.G., Garcia, J.E., Dorin, A. (2021). Towards precision apiculture: Traditional and techno- logical insect monitoring methods in straw- berry and raspberry crop polytunnels tell diﬀerent pollination stories. Plos one, 16(5), e0251572. Høye, T.T., ¨Arje, J., Bjerge, K., Hansen, O.L., Iosiﬁdis, A., Leese, F., . . . Raitoharju, J. (2021). Deep learning and computer vision will transform entomology. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(2). Jolles, J.W. (2021). Broad-scale applications of the raspberry pi: A review and guide for biol- ogists. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 12(9), 1562–1579. Kamilaris, A., & Prenafeta-Bold´u, F.X. (2018). Deep learning in agriculture: A survey. Com- puters and electronics in agriculture, 147, 70–90. Kevan, P.G. (1975). Sun-tracking solar furnaces in high arctic ﬂowers: signiﬁcance for pol- lination and insects. Science, 189(4204), 723–726. Kirkeby, C., Rydhmer, K., Cook, S.M., Strand, A., Torrance, M.T., Swain, J.L., . . . others (2021). Advances in automatic identiﬁcation of ﬂying insects using optical sensors and machine learning. Scientiﬁc reports, 11(1), 1–8. Koirala, A., Walsh, K.B., Wang, Z., McCarthy, C. (2019). Deep learning–method overview and review of use for fruit detection and yield estimation. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 162, 219–234. Kuhn, H.W. (1955). The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics quarterly, 2(1-2), 83–97. Lu, H., Fu, X., Liu, C., Li, L.-g., He, Y.-x., Li, N.-w. (2017). Cultivated land information extraction in uav imagery based on deep convolutional neural network and transfer learning. Journal of Mountain Science, 14(4), 731–741. MacInnis, G., & Forrest, J.R. (2019). Pollina- tion by wild bees yields larger strawberries than pollination by honey bees. Journal of Applied Ecology, 56(4), 824–832. Magnier, B., Gabbay, E., Bougamale, F., Moradi, B., Pﬁster, F., Slangen, P. (2019). Multiple honey bees tracking and trajectory model- ing. Multimodal sensing: Technologies and applications (Vol. 11059, p. 110590Z). Odemer, R. (2022). Approaches, challenges and recent advances in automated bee count- ing devices: A review. Annals of Applied Biology, 180(1), 73–89. O’Grady, M., Langton, D., O’Hare, G. (2019). Edge computing: A tractable model for smart agriculture? Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture, 3, 42–51. Outhwaite, C., McCann, P., Newbold, T. (2022). Agriculture and climate change reshape insect biodiversity worldwide. Nature. P´erez-Escudero, A., Vicente-Page, J., Hinz, R.C., Arganda, S., De Polavieja, G.G. (2014). idtracker: tracking individuals in a group by automatic identiﬁcation of unmarked ani- mals. Nature methods, 11(7), 743–748. 20 Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination Potts, S.G., Imperatriz-Fonseca, V., Ngo, H.T., Aizen, M.A., Biesmeijer, J.C., Breeze, T.D., . . . others (2016). Safeguarding pollina- tors and their values to human well-being. Nature, 540(7632), 220–229. Rader, R., Bartomeus, I., Garibaldi, L.A., Gar- ratt, M.P., Howlett, B.G., Winfree, R., . . . others (2016). Non-bee insects are impor- tant contributors to global crop pollination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- ences, 113(1), 146–151. Ratnayake, M.N., Dyer, A.G., Dorin, A. (2021a). Towards computer vision and deep learn- ing facilitated pollination monitoring for agriculture. Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 2921–2930). Ratnayake, M.N., Dyer, A.G., Dorin, A. (2021b). Tracking individual honeybees among wildﬂower clusters with computer vision- facilitated pollinator monitoring. Plos one, 16(2), e0239504. Real, L. (2012). Pollination biology. Elsevier. Redmon, J., & Farhadi, A. (2017). Yolo9000: bet- ter, faster, stronger. Proceedings of the ieee conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 7263–7271). Rollin, O., & Garibaldi, L.A. (2019). Impacts of honeybee density on crop yield: A meta- analysis. Journal of Applied Ecology, 56(5), 1152—1163. Schweiger, O., Biesmeijer, J.C., Bommarco, R., Hickler, T., Hulme, P.E., Klotz, S., . . . oth- ers (2010). Multiple stressors on biotic interactions: how climate change and alien species interact to aﬀect pollination. Biolog- ical Reviews, 85(4), 777–795. Sekachev, B., Manovich, N., Zhavoronkov, A. (2019). Computer vision anno- tation tool. Zenodo. (GitHub: https://github.com/opencv/cvat) 10.5281/zenodo.3497106 Settele, J., Bishop, J., Potts, S.G. (2016). Cli- mate change impacts on pollination. Nature Plants, 2(7), 1–3. Simons, D.J., & Chabris, C.F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic events. perception, 28(9), 1059– 1074. Spaethe, J., Tautz, J., Chittka, L. (2001). Visual constraints in foraging bumblebees: ﬂower size and color aﬀect search time and ﬂight behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(7), 3898–3903. Spencer, E.E., Barton, P.S., Ripple, W.J., New- some, T.M. (2020). Invasive european wasps alter scavenging dynamics around carrion. Food Webs, 24, e00144. Stojni´c, V., Risojevi´c, V., Muˇstra, M., Jovanovi´c, V., Filipi, J., Kezi´c, N., Babi´c, Z. (2021). A method for detection of small moving objects in uav videos. Remote Sensing, 13(4), 653. Su, D., Kong, H., Qiao, Y., Sukkarieh, S. (2021). Data augmentation for deep learning based semantic segmentation and crop-weed classi- ﬁcation in agricultural robotics. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 190, 106418. Vanbergen, A.J., & Initiative, t.I.P. (2013). Threats to an ecosystem service: pressures on pollinators. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 11(5), 251–259. van der Kooi, C.J., Kevan, P.G., Koski, M.H. (2019). The thermal ecology of ﬂowers. Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination 21 Annals of Botany, 124(3), 343–353. Van Horn, G., Mac Aodha, O., Song, Y., Cui, Y., Sun, C., Shepard, A., . . . Belongie, S. (2018). The inaturalist species classiﬁca- tion and detection dataset. Proceedings of the ieee conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 8769–8778). Walter, T., & Couzin, I.D. (2021). Trex, a fast multi-animal tracking system with mark- erless identiﬁcation, and 2d estimation of posture and visual ﬁelds. eLife, 10, e64000. Wang, S., Liu, W., Wu, J., Cao, L., Meng, Q., Kennedy, P.J. (2016). Training deep neu- ral networks on imbalanced data sets. 2016 international joint conference on neural net- works (ijcnn) (pp. 4368–4374). Wood, T.J., Michez, D., Paxton, R.J., Drossart, M., Neumann, P., Gerard, M., . . . others (2020). Managed honey bees as a radar for wild bee decline? Apidologie, 51(6), 1100–1116. Yang, C., Collins, J., Beckerleg, M. (2018). A model for pollen measurement using video monitoring of honey bees. Sensing and Imaging, 19(1), 1–29. Zivkovic, Z., & Van Der Heijden, F. (2006). Eﬃ- cient adaptive density estimation per image pixel for the task of background subtraction. Pattern recognition letters, 27(7), 773–780. International Journal of Computer Vision Spatial Monitoring and Insect Behavioural Analysis Using Computer Vision for Precision Pollination Supplementary Information Malika Nisal Ratnayake∗1, Don Chathurika Amarathunga1, Asaduz Zaman1, Adrian G. Dyer2,3 and Alan Dorin1 1Computational and Collective Intelligence Group, Dept. of Data Science and AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia. 2School of Media and Communication, RMIT University, Victoria 3000, Australia 3Department of Physiology, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia. Contents Supplementary Table: Details of Test Video Dataset 2 Supplementary Table: Fields of View of the Test Video Dataset 3 Supplementary Figure: Distribution of Image Region Changes in Test Videos 5 Supplementary Table: YOLOv4 Test and Training Dataset Information 6 Supplementary Data: YOLOv4 Evaluation Results 6 Supplementary Table: Insect Trajectory and Flower Visit Detection Evaluation 9 Supplementary Figure: Insect Trajectories Extracted from Test Dataset Videos 9 Supplementary Table: Flower Detection Evaluation 14 Supplementary Table: Test Dataset Processing Time 16 ∗Corresponding Author: malika.ratnayake@monash.edu 1 arXiv:2205.04675v2 [cs.CV] 11 Nov 2022 Supplementary Table: Details of Test Video Dataset “Camera Number” shows the number of the Raspberry Pi camera unit that was used to record the date. “Record Date” is the date video was captured. “Number of frames” gives the total frames in the video, and “Frames with insects” presents the total number of frames with an insect visible in each video. The number of insects visible for more than 5 frames is shown in the insect column. “No. of Flowers” shows the total number of fully open visible ﬂowers in a test video. Test Video Camera Number Record Date No. of Frames No. of frames with Insects Number of Insects Observed No. of Flowers Honeybees Syrphidae Lepidoptera Vespidae T1 4 9/03/2021 18002 3181 1 2 - - 8 T2 8 10/03/2021 18003 1352 1 - - - 9 T3 7 10/03/2021 18004 5580 1 - 1 1 6 T4 3 17/03/2021 17959 2044 7 - - 1 7 T5 1 17/03/2021 18012 645 2 - - 1 7 T6 2 8/03/2021 18004 532 - - - 5 5 T7 3 12/03/2021 18000 5319 3 - 1 - 7 T8 1 15/03/2021 17967 2341 5 - 1 2 6 T9 4 17/03/2021 18004 623 - 1 1 - 9 T10 4 17/03/2021 17951 2412 - 3 - 8 8 Total - - 179906 24029 20 6 4 10 72 2 Supplementary Table: Fields of View (FoV) of the Test Video Dataset Supplementary Table: Fields of View (FoV) of the Test Video Dataset T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 3 Supplementary Table: Fields of Views (FoV) of the Test Video Dataset T7 T8 T9 T10 4 Supplementary Figure: Distribution of the Number of Image Re- gion Changes in Test Videos Supplementary Figure: Distribution of the Number of Image Region Changes in Test Videos. The number of image regions is the number of non-intersecting regions of area greater than that of an insect. The red diamond indicates the mean value and the orange line shows the median. 5 Supplementary Table: YOLOv4 Test and Training Dataset Infor- mation Supplementary Table: YOLOv4 Training and Test Dataset Information. The YOLOv4 dataset was trained for four classes (3 insect classes and 1 ﬂower class). Honeybees and Vespidae were included in a single Hymenopteran class due to their physical similarities and the diﬃculty of automatically distinguishing between them using the low-quality video footage extracted from the Raspberry Pi cameras. Dataset Images Number of instances in a class Honeybee / Vespidae (wasp) Syrphidae (hoverﬂy) Lepidoptera (moth and butterﬂy) Strawberry Flower Training 3073 2331/371 204 93 14050 Testing 337 258/44 20 15 2909 Total 3410 2589/415 224 108 16959 Supplementary Data: YOLOv4 Evaluation Results Training_epoches = 7000 detections_count = 5590, unique_truth_count = 3246 class id = 0, name = Honeybee/Vespidae, ap = 65.79% (TP - 189, FP = 147) class id = 1, name = flower, ap = 93.67% (TP = 2558, FP = 163) class_id = 2, name = hoverfly, ap = 0.15% (TP = 0, FP = 2) class_id = 3, name = moth, ap = 85.42% (TP - 8, FP = 0) for conf_thresh = 0.25, precision = 0.90, recall - 0.85, F1-score = 0.87 for conf_thresh = 0.25, TP = 2755, FP - 312, FN = 491, average IOU = 75.50% IOU threshold = 50%, used Area-Under-Curve for each unique Recall mean Average Precision (mAP@0.50) = 0.612543, or 61.25% Total Detection Time: 28 Seconds 6 Supplementary Table: Results of the Insect Trajectory and Flower Visit Detection Evaluation for the Test Video Dataset. “Trajectory Code” shows the identiﬁcation code of the extracted track. “Manual Observation” shows the insect track data obtained through manual human observation of test videos. “Entry frame” is the frame the insect ﬁrst entered the video frame. “Exit frame” is the last frame the insect is visible inside the frame. If an insect departed the frame and later reappeared, or if it ﬂew under the foliage and later reappeared, it was considered a “new” insect. “Occluded Frames” shows the number of frames the insect was partially occluded. “Visible Frames” shows the number of frames the insect was fully visible. “Confusion Metrics” compares trajectories extracted by our algorithm against manual observations. TP = True Positive, FP = False Positive, and FN = False Negative. A detection was considered a True Positive if the algorithm recorded the position of an insect in an area that was in fact covered by the body of the insect. “Detection Evaluation Metrics” presents the Precision, Recall and F-Score metrics for each track based on the confusion metrics. Metrics were only calculated for extracted trajectories. “Flower Visit Data” compares the insect ﬂower visits detected by the system against manual human observations. Test Video Insect Type Trajectory Code Manual Observations Confusion Metrics Detection Evaluation Metrics Flower Visit Detection Entry Frame Exit Frame Occluded Frames Visible Frames TP FP FN Precision Recall F-Score Observed TP FP FN T1 Syrphidae 40913315501 10529 10931 0 402 336 0 66 1.00 0.84 0.91 1 1 0 0 Syrphidae 40913321301 11072 11119 0 47 37 0 10 1.00 0.79 0.88 0 0 1 0 Honeybee 40913341400 14722 17493 39 2732 2566 116 50 0.96 0.98 0.97 10 10 0 0 40913342400 40913345500 T2 Honeybee 81013473200 15861 17213 0 1352 1347 3 2 1.00 1.00 1.00 7 7 0 0 T3 Lepidoptera Not Tracked 6352 6367 0 15 Trajectory Not Available 0 0 0 0 Vespidae 71014275703 6958 6968 0 10 5 0 5 1.00 0.50 0.67 0 0 0 0 Honeybee 71014294500 9918 15473 0 5555 5243 7 305 1.00 0.95 0.97 11 9 0 2 T4 Honeybee 31714302100 5902 6126 0 224 212 0 12 1.00 0.95 0.97 1 1 0 0 Honeybee 31714304100 6505 6585 0 80 78 0 2 1.00 0.98 0.99 0 0 0 0 Honeybee 31714305200 6831 7142 0 311 290 15 6 0.95 0.98 0.97 2 2 0 0 Honeybee 31714310600 7232 7586 0 354 354 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 2 2 0 0 Honeybee 31714311900 7596 7679 0 83 57 0 26 1.00 0.69 0.81 1 1 0 0 Vespidae 31714325703 10569 10598 0 29 22 0 7 1.00 0.76 0.86 0 0 0 0 Honeybee 31714330200 10733 10749 0 16 11 0 5 1.00 0.69 0.81 0 0 0 0 Honeybee 31714331200 11014 11961 0 947 731 58 158 0.93 0.82 0.87 7 7 0 0 31714331800 T5 Honeybee 11712303500 925 950 0 25 12 0 13 1 0.48 0.65 0 0 0 0 Vespidae 11712383603 15368 15373 0 5 3 0 2 1 0.60 0.75 0 0 0 0 Honeybee 11712394400 17396 18011 0 615 583 0 32 1 0.95 0.97 2 2 0 0 7 Supplementary Table: Results of the Insect Trajectory and Flower Visit Detection Evaluation for the Test Video Dataset. “Trajectory Code” shows the identiﬁcation code of the extracted track. “Manual Observation” shows the insect track data obtained through manual human observation of test videos. “Entry frame” is the frame the insect ﬁrst entered the video frame. “Exit frame” is the last frame insect visible inside the frame. If an insect departed the frame and later reappeared, or if it ﬂew under the foliage and later reappeared, it was considered a “new” insect. “Occluded Frames” shows the number of frames insect was partially occluded. “Visible Frames” shows the number of frames the insect is fully visible. “Confusion Metrics” compares trajectories extracted by our algorithm against manual observations. TP = True Positive, FP = False Positive, and FN = False Negative. A detection was considered a True Positive if the algorithm recorded the position of an insect in an area that was in fact covered by the body of the insect. “Detection Evaluation Metrics” calculates the Precision, Recall and F-Score metrics for each track based on the confusion metrics. Metrics were only calculated for extracted trajectories. “Flower Visit Detection” compares the insect ﬂower visits detected by the system against manual human observations. Test Video Insect Type Trajectory Code Manual Observations Confusion Metrics Detection Evaluation Metrics Flower Visit Detection Entry Frame Exit Frame Occluded Frames Visible Frames TP FP FN Precision Recall F-Score Observed TP FP FN T6 Vespidae 20811265803 5296 5420 6 118 114 1 3 0.99 0.97 0.98 0 0 0 0 Vespidae 20811270403 5474 5563 0 89 79 0 10 1.00 0.89 0.94 0 0 0 0 Vespidae 20811271003 5648 5670 0 22 17 0 5 1.00 0.77 0.87 0 0 0 0 Vespidae 20811271203 5686 5768 0 82 59 0 23 1.00 0.72 0.84 0 0 0 0 Vespidae 20811273303 6244 6545 80 221 163 0 58 1.00 0.74 0.85 0 0 0 0 T7 Lepidoptera 31212363302 8113 11037 0 2924 1395 0 1529 1 0.48 0.65 5 5 0 0 31212375502 31212381002 Honeybee 31212390300 12608 14210 0 1602 1588 1 13 1.00 0.99 1.00 11 11 0 0 Honeybee 31212402700 15129 15587 0 458 458 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 2 2 0 0 Honeybee 31212413000 17013 17348 0 335 335 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 3 3 0 0 T8 Honeybee 11513300100 3517 4116 0 599 599 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 2 2 0 0 Honeybee 11513303900 4649 5213 0 564 562 2 1.00 1.00 1.00 2 2 0 0 Honeybee 11513305900 5258 5851 0 593 588 1 4 1.00 0.99 1.00 1 1 0 0 Honeybee 11513313000 6200 6238 0 38 37 1 0 0.97 1.00 0.99 1 1 0 0 Vespidae 11513325003 8590 8596 0 6 2 0 4 1.00 0.33 0.50 0 0 Lepidoptera 11513335102 10434 10605 0 171 163 4 4 0.98 0.98 0.98 1 1 1 0 Honeybee 11513365400 15919 16282 0 363 356 0 7 1.00 0.98 0.99 2 2 0 0 Vespidae 11513375903 17877 17884 0 7 7 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 0 0 0 0 T9 Lepidoptera 41711511502 5795 5846 0 48 33 0 15 1.00 0.69 0.81 0 0 0 0 Syrphidae Not Tracked 17374 17949 0 575 Tracking Data Not Available 0 0 0 0 T10 Syrphidae 41712110101 5350 7257 0 1907 584 0 1323 1.00 0.31 0.47 2 1 0 1 41712111901 Syrphidae 41712164401 15593 15864 0 271 176 2 93 0.99 0.65 0.79 1 1 0 0 Syrphidae 41712171901 16716 16950 0 234 230 0 4 1.00 0.98 0.99 1 1 0 0 8 Supplementary Figures: Insect Trajectories Extracted from Test Dataset Videos 9 10 11 12 13 Supplementary Table: Results of the Flower Detection Evaluation Supplementary Table: Results of the Flower Detection Evaluation for the Test Video Dataset. “No. of Flowers” compares the number of manual human observed fully open and fully visible ﬂowers in the video against that detected by the ﬂower tracking component of the algorithm. “Visible Frames” shows the number of frames the ﬂower is fully visible. Flower positions were updated at an interval of 100 seconds (3000 frames). “Confusion Metrics” compares ﬂower trajectories extracted by our algorithm against manual observations. TP = True Positive, FP = False Positive, and FN = False Negative. A detection was considered a True Positive if the ﬂower bounding circle generated by the algorithm covered the area of the ﬂower. “Detection Evaluation Metrics” presents the Precision, Recall and F-Score metrics for each track based on the confusion metrics. Metrics were only calculated for extracted trajectories. Test Video No. of Flowers Flower Code Visible Frames Confusion Metrics Detection Evaluation Metrics Observed Recorded TP FP FN Precision Recall F-Score T1 8 8 F0 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F6 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F7 17942 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 T2 9 9 F0 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F6 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F7 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F8 17943 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 T3 6 5 F0 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 N/A 17944 Trajectory Not Available T4 7 6 F0 17899 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17899 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17899 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17899 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17899 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17899 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 N/A 17899 Trajectory Not Available 14 Test Video No. of Flowers Flower Code Visible Frames Confusion Metrics Detection Evaluation Metrics Observed Recorded TP FP FN Precision Recall F-Score T5 7 7 F0 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F6 17952 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 T6 5 5 F0 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 T7 7 6 F0 17940 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17940 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17940 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17940 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17940 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17940 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 N/A 17940 Trajectory Not Available T8 6 6 F0 17907 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17907 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17907 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17907 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17907 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17907 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 T9 9 8 F0 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F6 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F7 17944 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 N/A 17944 Trajectory Not Available T10 8 8 F0 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F1 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F2 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F3 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F4 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F5 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F6 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 F7 17891 6 0 0 1.00 1.00 1.00 15 Supplementary Table: Test Dataset Processing Time Supplementary Table: Test Dataset Processing Time. Processing Times (seconds) and speeds (frames per second - fps) for the test dataset with and without the low-resolution processing mode (adopted from Polytrack (?)). Processing time denotes the time taken by the algorithm to process a video and the processing speed shows the average number of frames processed in a second. Test Video Processing Time (sec) Processing Speed (fps) With Low-Res Mode Without Low-Res Mode With Low-Res Mode Without Low-Res Mode T1 939.9 2414.3 19.2 7.5 T2 993.5 2631.9 18.1 6.8 T3 1440.0 2937.4 12.5 6.1 T4 921.8 2314.2 19.5 7.8 T5 737.6 2316.7 24.4 7.8 T6 587.2 1959.0 30.7 9.2 T7 1167.7 2332.5 15.4 7.7 T8 853.9 2153.4 21.0 8.3 T9 500.3 2042.8 36.0 8.8 T10 656.0 2258.9 27.4 7.9 Overall 8797.9 23361.1 20.4 7.7 16